# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 52-60
############################################################

o/Geometricalscalingofanimals.
times more body mass will have only four times more surface area.
This behavior of the ratio of surface area to mass (or, equiv-
alently, the ratio of surface area to volume) has important conse-
quences for mammals, which must maintain a constant body tem-
perature. It would make sense for the rate of heat loss through the
animal’s skin to be proportional to its surface area, so we should
expect small animals, having large ratios of surface area to volume,
toneedtoproduceagreatdealofheatincomparisontotheirsizeto
avoid dying from low body temperature. This expectation is borne
out by the data of the left-hand panel of figure p, showing the rate
of oxygen consumption of guinea pigs as a function of their body
mass. Neither an animal’s heat production nor its surface area is
convenient to measure, but in order to produce heat, the animal
must metabolize oxygen, so oxygen consumption is a good indicator
of the rate of heat production. Since surface area is proportional to
m2/3, theproportionalityoftherateofoxygenconsumptiontom2/3
isconsistentwiththeideathattheanimalneedstoproduceheatata
rate in proportion to its surface area. Although the smaller animals
52 Chapter 1 Scaling and estimation

p/Scalingofanimals’bodiesrelatedtometabolicrateandskeletalstrength.
metabolize less oxygen and produce less heat in absolute terms, the
amount of food and oxygen they must consume is greater in propor-
tion to their own mass. The Etruscan pigmy shrew, weighing in at
2 grams as an adult, is at about the lower size limit for mammals.
It must eat continually, consuming many times its body weight each
day to survive.
Changes in shape to accommodate changes in size
Large mammals, such as elephants, have a small ratio of surface
area to volume, and have problems getting rid of their heat fast
enough. An elephant cannot simply eat small enough amounts to
keep from producing excessive heat, because cells need to have a
certain minimum metabolic rate to run their internal machinery.
Hence the elephant’s large ears, which add to its surface area and
help it to cool itself. Previously, we have seen several examples
of data within a given species that were consistent with a fixed
shape,scaledupanddowninthecasesofindividualspecimens. The
elephant’s ears are an example of a change in shape necessitated by
a change in scale.
Section 1.3 ? Scaling applied to biology 53

Large animals also must be able to support their own weight.
Returning to the example of the strengths of planks of di↵erent
sizes, we can see that if the strength of the plank depends on area
while its weight depends on volume, then the ratio of strength to
weight goes as follows:
strength/weight A/V 1/L.
/ /
Thus, the ability of objects to support their own weights decreases
inversely in proportion to their linear dimensions. If an object is to
be just barely able to support its own weight, then a larger version
will have to be proportioned di↵erently, with a di↵erent shape.
Since the data on the cockroaches seemed to be consistent with
roughly similar shapes within the species, it appears that the abil-
ity to support its own weight was not the tightest design constraint
that Nature was working under when she designed them. For large
animals, structural strength is important. Galileo was the first to
quantify this reasoning and to explain why, for instance, a large an-
imal must have bones that are thicker in proportion to their length.
Consideraroughlycylindricalbonesuchasalegboneoravertebra.
Thelengthofthebone, L, isdictatedbytheoveralllinearsizeofthe
animal, since the animal’s skeleton must reach the animal’s whole
length. We expect the animal’s mass to scale as L3, so the strength
of the bone must also scale as L3. Strength is proportional to cross-
sectional area, as with the wooden planks, so if the diameter of the
bone is d, then
q/Galileo’s original drawing,
d2 L3
showing how larger animals’
/
bones must be greater in diam-
or
eter compared to their lengths.
d L3/2.
/
If the shape stayed the same regardless of size, then all linear di-
mensions, including d and L, would be proportional to one another.
If our reasoning holds, then the fact that d is proportional to L3/2,
not L, implies a change in proportions of the bone. As shown in the
right-hand panel of figure p, the vertebrae of African Bovidae follow
the rule d L3/2 fairly well. The vertebrae of the giant eland are
/
as chunky as a co↵ee mug, while those of a Gunther’s dik-dik are as
slender as the cap of a pen.
Discussion questions
A Single-celled animals must passively absorb nutrients and oxygen
fromtheirsurroundings,unlikehumanswhohavelungstopumpairinand
outandahearttodistributetheoxygenatedbloodthroughouttheirbodies.
Eventhecellscomposingthebodiesofmulticellularanimalsmustabsorb
oxygen from a nearby capillary through their surfaces. Based on these
facts,explainwhycellsarealwaysmicroscopicinsize.
B The reasoning of the previous question would seem to be contra-
dicted by the fact that human nerve cells in the spinal cord can be as
much as a meter long, although their widths are still very small. Why is
thispossible?
54 Chapter 1 Scaling and estimation

1.4 Order-of-magnitude estimates
It is the mark of an instructed mind to rest satisfied with the
degreeofprecisionthatthenatureofthesubjectpermitsand
nottoseekanexactnesswhereonlyanapproximationofthe
truth is possible.
Aristotle
It is a common misconception that science must be exact. For
instance, in the Star Trek TV series, it would often happen that
Captain Kirk would ask Mr. Spock, “Spock, we’re in a pretty bad
situation. What do you think are our chances of getting out of
here?” The scientific Mr. Spock would answer with something like,
“Captain, I estimate the odds as 237.345 to one.” In reality, he
could not have estimated the odds with six significant figures of
accuracy, but nevertheless one of the hallmarks of a person with a
good education in science is the ability to make estimates that are
likely to be at least somewhere in the right ballpark. In many such
situations,itisoftenonlynecessarytogetananswerthatiso↵byno
more than a factor of ten in either direction. Since things that di↵er
by a factor of ten are said to di↵er by one order of magnitude, such
an estimate is called an order-of-magnitude estimate. The tilde,
, is used to indicate that things are only of the same order of
⇠
magnitude, but not exactly equal, as in
odds of survival 100 to one.
⇠
The tilde can also be used in front of an individual number to em-
phasize that the number is only of the right order of magnitude.
Althoughmakingorder-of-magnitudeestimatesseemssimpleand
natural to experienced scientists, it’s a mode of reasoning that is
completely unfamiliar to most college students. Some of the typical
mental steps can be illustrated in the following example.
Cost of transporting tomatoes (incorrect solution) example 4
. Roughly what percentage of the price of a tomato comes from
the cost of transporting it in a truck?
.Thefollowingincorrectsolutionillustratesoneofthemainways
you can go wrong in order-of-magnitude estimates.
Incorrect solution: Let’s say the trucker needs to make a $400
profitonthetrip. Takingintoaccountherbenefits,thecostofgas,
and maintenance and payments on the truck, let’s say the total
cost is more like $2000. I’d guess about 5000 tomatoes would fit
in the back of the truck, so the extra cost per tomato is 40 cents.
Thatmeansthecostoftransportingonetomatoiscomparableto
thecostofthetomatoitself. Transportationreallyaddsalottothe
cost of produce, I guess.
The problem is that the human brain is not very good at esti-
matingareaorvolume,soitturnsouttheestimateof5000tomatoes
Section 1.4 Order-of-magnitude estimates 55

fitting in the truck is way o↵. That’s why people have a hard time
at those contests where you are supposed to estimate the number of
jellybeans in a big jar. Another example is that most people think
their families use about 10 gallons of water per day, but in reality
the average is about 300 gallons per day. When estimating area
or volume, you are much better o↵ estimating linear dimensions,
and computing volume from the linear dimensions. Here’s a better
solution to the problem about the tomato truck:
Cost of transporting tomatoes (correct solution) example 5
As in the previous solution, say the cost of the trip is $2000. The
dimensions of the bin are probably 4 m 2 m 1 m, for a vol-
⇥ ⇥
ume of 8 m3. Since the whole thing is just an order-of-magnitude
estimate, let’s round that off to the nearest power of ten, 10 m3.
The shape of a tomato is complicated, and I don’t know any for-
mula for the volume of a tomato shape, but since this is just an
r/Can you guess how many estimate,let’spretendthatatomatoisacube,0.05m 0.05m
⇥ ⇥
jelly beans are in the jar? If you 0.05m,foravolumeof1.25 10 4 m3. Sincethisisjustarough
 
⇥
try to guess directly, you will estimate, let’s round that to 10 4m3. We can find the total num-
 
almost certainly underestimate.
ber of tomatoes by dividing the volume of the bin by the volume
The right way to do it is to esti- of one tomato: 10 m3/10 4 m3 = 105 tomatoes. The transporta-
 
mate the linear dimensions, then
tion cost per tomato is $2000/105 tomatoes=$0.02/tomato. That
get the volume indirectly. See
means that transportation really doesn’t contribute very much to
problem26,p.62.
the cost of a tomato.
Approximating the shape of a tomato as a cube is an example of
another general strategy for making order-of-magnitude estimates.
A similar situation would occur if you were trying to estimate how
many m2 of leather could be produced from a herd of ten thousand
cattle. There is no point in trying to take into account the shape of
the cows’ bodies. A reasonable plan of attack might be to consider
a spherical cow. Probably a cow has roughly the same surface area
as a sphere with a radius of about 1 m, which would be 4⇡(1 m)2.
Usingthewell-knownfactsthatpiequalsthree,andfourtimesthree
equalsaboutten,wecanguessthatacowhasasurfaceareaofabout
10 m2, so the herd as a whole might yield 105 m2 of leather.
Estimating mass indirectly example 6
Usually the best way to estimate mass is to estimate linear di-
mensions, then use those to infer volume, and then get the mass
s/Consider a spherical cow. based on the volume. For example, Amphicoelias, shown in the
figure,mayhavebeenthelargestlandanimalevertolive. Fossils
tell us the linear dimensions of an animal, but we can only indi-
rectly guess its mass. Given the length scale in the figure, let’s
estimate the mass of an Amphicoelias.
Its torso looks like it can be approximated by a rectangular box
withdimensions10m 5m 3m,givingabout2 102 m3. Living
⇥ ⇥ ⇥
things are mostly made of water, so we assume the animal to
havethedensityofwater,1g/cm3,whichconvertsto103 kg/m3.
56 Chapter 1 Scaling and estimation

This gives a mass of about 2 105 kg, or 200 metric tons.
⇥
The following list summarizes the strategies for getting a good
order-of-magnitude estimate.
1. Don’t even attempt more than one significant figure of preci-
sion.
2. Don’t guess area, volume, or mass directly. Guess linear di-
mensions and get area, volume, or mass from them.
3. When dealing with areas or volumes of objects with complex
shapes, idealize them as if they were some simpler shape, a
cube or a sphere, for example.
4. Check your final answer to see if it is reasonable. If you esti-
mate that a herd of ten thousand cattle would yield 0.01 m2
of leather, then you have probably made a mistake with con-
version factors somewhere.
Section 1.4 Order-of-magnitude estimates 57

Summary
Notation
. . . . . . . . . is proportional to
/
. . . . . . . . . on the order of, is on the order of
⇠
Summary
Nature behaves di↵erently on large and small scales. Galileo
showed that this results fundamentally from the way area and vol-
ume scale. Area scales as the second power of length, A L2, while
/
volume scales as length to the third power, V L3.
/
An order of magnitude estimate is one in which we do not at-
tempt or expect an exact answer. The main reason why the unini-
tiated have trouble with order-of-magnitude estimates is that the
human brain does not intuitively make accurate estimates of area
and volume. Estimates of area and volume should be approached
by first estimating linear dimensions, which one’s brain has a feel
for.
58 Chapter 1 Scaling and estimation

Problems
Key
p A computerized answer check is available online.
A problem that requires calculus.
? A di cult problem.
R
1 How many cubic inches are there in a cubic foot? The answer
is not 12. p
2 Assume a dog’s brain is twice as great in diameter as a cat’s,
but each animal’s brain cells are the same size and their brains are
the same shape. In addition to being a far better companion and
much nicer to come home to, how many times more brain cells does
a dog have than a cat? The answer is not 2.
3 ThepopulationdensityofLosAngelesisabout4000people/km2.
That of San Francisco is about 6000 people/km2. How many times
farther away is the average person’s nearest neighbor in LA than in
San Francisco? The answer is not 1.5. p
4 A hunting dog’s nose has about 10 square inches of active
surface. How is this possible, since the dog’s nose is only about 1 in
1 in 1 in = 1 in3? After all, 10 is greater than 1, so how can it
⇥ ⇥
fit?
5 Estimate the number of blades of grass on a football field.
6 In a computer memory chip, each bit of information (a 0 or
a 1) is stored in a single tiny circuit etched onto the surface of a
silicon chip. The circuits cover the surface of the chip like lots in a
housing development. A typical chip stores 64 Mb (megabytes) of
data, where a byte is 8 bits. Estimate (a) the area of each circuit,
and (b) its linear size.
7 Suppose someone built a gigantic apartment building, mea-
suring 10 km 10 km at the base. Estimate how tall the building
⇥
wouldhavetobetohavespaceinitfortheentireworld’spopulation
to live.
8 A hamburger chain advertises that it has sold 10 billion Bongo
Burgers. Estimate the total mass of feed required to raise the cows
used to make the burgers.
9 Estimate the volume of a human body, in cm3.
10 How many cm2 is 1 mm2? . Solution, p. 534
11 Compare the light-gathering powers of a 3-cm-diameter tele-
scope and a 30-cm telescope. . Solution, p. 534
12 One step on the Richter scale corresponds to a factor of 100
in terms of the energy absorbed by something on the surface of the
Earth, e.g., a house. For instance, a 9.3-magnitude quake would
release 100 times more energy than an 8.3. The energy spreads out
Problems 59