# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 564-569
############################################################

he fit the microscopic universe into the picture as well.
ItshouldnotsurpriseusthatNewtonfailed. Althoughhewasafirm
believer in the existence of atoms, there was no more experimental
evidence for their existence than there had been when the ancient
Greeksfirstpositedthemonpurelyphilosophicalgrounds. Alchemy
labored under a tradition of secrecy and mysticism. Newton had
already almost single-handedly transformed the fuzzyheaded field
of “natural philosophy” into something we would recognize as the
modern science of physics, and it would be unjust to criticize him
for failing to change alchemy into modern chemistry as well. The
time was not ripe. The microscope was a new invention, and it was
cutting-edgesciencewhenNewton’scontemporaryHookediscovered
that living things were made out of cells.
21.1 The quest for the atomic force
Newton was not the first of the age of reason. He was the last of
the magicians. John Maynard Keynes
Nevertheless it will be instructive to pick up Newton’s train of
thought and see where it leads us with the benefit of modern hind-
sight. In uniting the human and cosmic scales of existence, he had
reimagined both as stages on which the actors were objects (trees
and houses, planets and stars) that interacted through attractions
and repulsions. He was already convinced that the objects inhab-
iting the microworld were atoms, so it remained only to determine
what kinds of forces they exerted on each other.
His next insight was no less brilliant for his inability to bring it to
fruition. He realized that the many human-scale forces — friction,
sticky forces, the normal forces that keep objects from occupying
the same space, and so on — must all simply be expressions of a
more fundamental force acting between atoms. Tape sticks to paper
because the atoms in the tape attract the atoms in the paper. My
house doesn’t fall to the center of the earth because its atoms repel
the atoms of the dirt under it.
Here he got stuck. It was tempting to think that the atomic force
was a form of gravity, which he knew to be universal, fundamental,
and mathematically simple. Gravity, however, is always attractive,
so how could he use it to explain the existence of both attractive
and repulsive atomic forces? The gravitational force between ob-
jects of ordinary size is also extremely small, which is why we never
notice cars and houses attracting us gravitationally. It would be
hard to understand how gravity could be responsible for anything
as vigorous as the beating of a heart or the explosion of gunpowder.
Newton went on to write a million words of alchemical notes filled
withspeculationaboutsomeotherforce, perhapsa“divineforce”or
“vegetative force” that would for example be carried by the sperm
564 Chapter 21 Electricity and circuits

to the egg.
Luckily, we now know enough to investigate a di↵erent suspect as a
candidate for the atomic force: electricity. Electric forces are often
observed between objects that have been prepared by rubbing (or
other surface interactions), for instance when clothes rub against
each other in the dryer. A useful example is shown in figure a/1:
stick two pieces of tape on a tabletop, and then put two more pieces
on top of them. Lift each pair from the table, and then separate
them. The two top pieces will then repel each other, a/2, as will
the two bottom pieces. A bottom piece will attract a top piece,
however, a/3. Electrical forces like these are similar in certain ways
to gravity, the other force that we already know to be fundamental:
Electrical forces are universal. Although some substances,
•
such as fur, rubber, and plastic, respond more strongly to
electrical preparation than others, all matter participates in
electrical forces to some degree. There is no such thing as a
“nonelectric” substance. Matter is both inherently gravita-
tional and inherently electrical.
Four pieces of tape are pre-
pared,1,asdescribedinthetext.
Experiments show that the electrical force, like the gravita-
Dependingonwhichcombination
•
tional force, is an inverse square force. That is, the electrical is tested, the interaction can be
force between two spheres is proportional to 1/r2, where r is either repulsive, 2, or attractive,
the center-to-center distance between them. 3.
Furthermore, electrical forces make more sense than gravity as can-
didates for the fundamental force between atoms, because we have
observed that they can be either attractive or repulsive.
21.2 Electrical forces
Charge
“Charge” is the technical term used to indicate that an object has
been prepared so as to participate in electrical forces. This is to
be distinguished from the common usage, in which the term is used
indiscriminately for anything electrical. For example, although we
speak colloquially of “charging” a battery, you may easily verify
that a battery has no charge in the technical sense, e.g., it does not
exert any electrical force on a piece of tape that has been prepared
as described in the previous section.
Two types of charge
We can easily collect reams of data on electrical forces between
di↵erent substances that have been charged in di↵erent ways. We
find for example that cat fur prepared by rubbing against rabbit
fur will attract glass that has been rubbed on silk. How can we
make any sense of all this information? A vast simplification is
Electrical forces 565

achieved by noting that there are really only two types of charge.
Suppose we pick cat fur rubbed on rabbit fur as a representative of
type A, and glass rubbed on silk for type B. We will now find that
there is no “type C.” Any object electrified by any method is either
A-like, attracting things A attracts and repelling those it repels, or
B-like, displayingthesameattractionsandrepulsionsasB.Thetwo
types, A and B, always display opposite interactions. If A displays
an attraction with some charged object, then B is guaranteed to
undergo repulsion with it, and vice-versa.
The coulomb
Although there are only two types of charge, each type can come in
di↵erentamounts. Themetricunitofchargeisthecoulomb(rhymes
with “drool on”), defined as follows:
One Coulomb (C) is the amount of charge such that a force of
9.0 109 N occurs between two pointlike objects with charges
⇥
of 1 C separated by a distance of 1 m.
The notation for an amount of charge is q. The numerical factor
in the definition is historical in origin, and is not worth memoriz-
ing. The definition is stated for pointlike, i.e., very small, objects,
because otherwise di↵erent parts of them would be at di↵erent dis-
tances from each other.
A model of two types of charged particles
Experiments show that all the methods of rubbing or otherwise
charging objects involve two objects, and both of them end up get-
ting charged. If one object acquires a certain amount of one type of
charge, then the other ends up with an equal amount of the other
type. Various interpretations of this are possible, but the simplest
is that the basic building blocks of matter come in two flavors, one
with each type of charge. Rubbing objects together results in the
transfer of some of these particles from one object to the other. In
thismodel,anobjectthathasnotbeenelectricallypreparedmayac-
tuallypossessesagreatdealofboth typesofcharge,buttheamounts
are equal and they are distributed in the same way throughout it.
Since type A repels anything that type B attracts, and vice versa,
the object will make a total force of zero on any other object. The
rest of this chapter fleshes out this model and discusses how these
mysterious particles can be understood as being internal parts of
atoms.
Use of positive and negative signs for charge
Because the two types of charge tend to cancel out each other’s
forces,itmakessensetolabelthemusingpositiveandnegativesigns,
and to discuss the total charge of an object. It is entirely arbitrary
which type of charge to call negative and which to call positive.
Benjamin Franklin decided to describe the one we’ve been calling
566 Chapter 21 Electricity and circuits

“A” as negative, but it really doesn’t matter as long as everyone is
consistent with everyone else. An object with a total charge of zero
(equal amounts of both types) is referred to as electrically neutral.
self-checkA
Criticizethefollowingstatement: “Therearetwotypesofcharge,attrac-
tiveandrepulsive.” .Answer,p.
1014
Coulomb’s law
A large body of experimental observations can be summarized as
follows:
Coulomb’s law: The magnitude of the force acting between point-
like charged objects at a center-to-center distance r is given by the
equation
q q
1 2
F = k| || |,
| | r2
where the constant k equals 9.0 109 Nm2/C2. The force is attrac-
⇥ ·
tive if the charges are of di↵erent signs, and repulsive if they have
the same sign.
Clever modern techniques have allowed the 1/r2 form of Coulomb’s
law to be tested to incredible accuracy, showing that the exponent
is in the range from 1.9999999999999998 to 2.0000000000000002.
Note that Coulomb’s law is closely analogous to Newton’s law of
gravity, where the magnitude of the force is Gm m /r2, except that
1 2
there is only one type of mass, not two, and gravitational forces
are never repulsive. Because of this close analogy between the two
types of forces, we can recycle a great deal of our knowledge of
gravitational forces. For instance, there is an electrical equivalent
of the shell theorem: the electrical forces exerted externally by a
uniformly charged spherical shell are the same as if all the charge
was concentrated at its center, and the forces exerted internally are
zero.
Conservation of charge
An even more fundamental reason for using positive and negative
signs for electrical charge is that experiments show that charge is
conserved according to this definition: in any closed system, the
total amount of charge is a constant. This is why we observe that
rubbing initially uncharged substances together always has the re-
sult that one gains a certain amount of one type of charge, while
the other acquires an equal amount of the other type. Conservation
of charge seems natural in our model in which matter is made of
positive and negative particles. If the charge on each particle is a
fixedpropertyofthattypeofparticle,andiftheparticlesthemselves
Electrical forces 567

can be neither created nor destroyed, then conservation of charge is
inevitable.
Electrical forces involving neutral objects
As shown in figure b, an electrically charged object can attract ob-
jects that are uncharged. How is this possible? The key is that
even though each piece of paper has a total charge of zero, it has at
least some charged particles in it that have some freedom to move.
Suppose that the tape is positively charged, c. Mobile particles in
the paper will respond to the tape’s forces, causing one end of the
paper to become negatively charged and the other to become posi-
tive. Theattractionbetweenthepaperandthetapeisnowstronger
than the repulsion, because the negatively charged end is closer to
the tape.
self-checkB
Whatwouldhavehappenedifthetapewasnegativelycharged? .
A charged piece of tape at-
tracts uncharged pieces of paper Answer,p. 1014
fromadistance,andtheyleapup
Discussion questions
toit.
A Iftheelectricalattractionbetweentwopointlikeobjectsatadistance
of1mis9 109N,whycan’tweinferthattheirchargesare+1and 1C?
⇥  
Whatfurtherobservationswouldweneedtodoinordertoprovethis?
B Anelectricallychargedpieceoftapewillbeattractedtoyourhand.
Does that allow us to tell whether the mobile charged particles in your
handarepositiveornegative,orboth?
21.3 Current
Unity of all types of electricity
We are surrounded by things we have been told are “electrical,”
but it’s far from obvious what they have in common to justify being
groupedtogether. Whatrelationshipistherebetweenthewaysocks
cling together and the way a battery lights a lightbulb? We have
been told that both an electric eel and our own brains are somehow
electrical in nature, but what do they have in common?
The paper has zero total charge,
butitdoeshavechargedparticles British physicist Michael Faraday (1791-1867) set out to address
initthatcanmove. this problem. He investigated electricity from a variety of sources
— including electric eels! — to see whether they could all produce
the same e↵ects, such as shocks and sparks, attraction and repul-
sion. “Heating” refers, for example, to the way a lightbulb filament
gets hot enough to glow and emit light. Magnetic induction is an
e↵ect discovered by Faraday himself that connects electricity and
magnetism. We will not study this e↵ect, which is the basis for the
electric generator, in detail until later in the book.
568 Chapter 21 Electricity and circuits