# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 481-489
############################################################

“TheGreatWaveOffKanagawa,”byKatsushikaHokusai(1760-1849).
Chapter 19
Free waves
Your vocal cords or a saxophone reed can vibrate, but being able
to vibrate wouldn’t be of much use unless the vibrations could be
transmitted to the listener’s ear by sound waves. What are waves
and why do they exist? Put your fingertip in the middle of a cup
of water and then remove it suddenly. You will have noticed two
results that are surprising to most people. First, the flat surface
of the water does not simply sink uniformly to fill in the volume
vacated by your finger. Instead, ripples spread out, and the process
of flattening out occurs over a long period of time, during which
the water at the center vibrates above and below the normal water
level. This type of wave motion is the topic of the present chapter.
Second, you have found that the ripples bounce o↵ of the walls of
the cup, in much the same way that a ball would bounce o↵ of a
wall. In the next chapter we discuss what happens to waves that
have a boundary around them. Until then, we confine ourselves to
wave phenomena that can be analyzed as if the medium (e.g., the
water) was infinite and the same everywhere.
It isn’t hard to understand why removing your fingertip creates rip- Dipping a finger in some wa-
ples rather than simply allowing the water to sink back down uni- ter, 1, causes a disturbance that
formly. The initial crater, (a), left behind by your finger has sloping spreadsoutward,2.
sides, and the water next to the crater flows downhill to fill in the
hole. The water far away, on the other hand, initially has no way of
481

knowing what has happened, because there is no slope for it to flow
down. As the hole fills up, the rising water at the center gains up-
ward momentum, and overshoots, creating a little hill where there
had been a hole originally. The area just outside of this region
has been robbed of some of its water in order to build the hill, so
a depressed “moat” is formed, (b). This e↵ect cascades outward,
producing ripples.
482 Chapter 19 Free waves

The two circular patterns of rip-
plespassthrougheachother. Un-
like material objects, wave pat-
terns can overlap in space, and
when this happens they combine
byaddition.
19.1 Wave motion
There are three main ways in which wave motion di↵ers from the
motion of objects made of matter.
1. Superposition
The most profound di↵erence is that waves do not display anything
analogous to the normal forces between objects that come in con-
tact. Two wave patterns can therefore overlap in the same region of
space, asshowninfigureb. Wherethetwowavescoincide, theyadd
together. Forinstance, supposethatatacertainlocationinatacer-
tain moment in time, each wave would have had a crest 3 cm above
the normal water level. The waves combine at this point to make
a 6-cm crest. We use negative numbers to represent depressions in
the water. If both waves would have had a trough measuring -3 cm,
then they combine to make an extra-deep -6 cm trough. A +3 cm
crest and a -3 cm trough result in a height of zero, i.e., the waves
momentarily cancel each other out at that point. This additive rule
isreferredtoastheprincipleofsuperposition,“superposition”being
merely a fancy word for “adding.”
Superposition can occur not just with sinusoidal waves like the ones
in the figure above but with waves of any shape. The figures on the
following page show superposition of wave pulses. A pulse is simply
a wave of very short duration. These pulses consist only of a single
hump or trough. If you hit a clothesline sharply, you will observe
pulses heading o↵ in both directions. This is analogous to the way
Wave motion 483

ripples spread out in all directions when you make a disturbance at
one point on water. The same occurs when the hammer on a piano
comes up and hits a string.
Experiments to date have not shown any deviation from the prin-
ciple of superposition in the case of light waves. For other types
of waves, it is typically a very good approximation for low-energy
waves.
Discussion question
A In figure c/3, the fifth frame shows the spring just about perfectly
flat. If the two pulses have essentially canceled each other out perfectly,
thenwhydoesthemotionpickupagain? Whydoesn’tthespringjuststay
flat?
These pictures show the motion of wave pulses along a spring. To make a pulse, one end of the
springwasshakenbyhand. Movieswerefilmed,andaseriesofframechosentoshowthemotion.1. Apulse
travelstotheleft.2. Superpositionoftwocollidingpositivepulses.3. Superpositionoftwocollidingpulses,one
positiveandonenegative.
484 Chapter 19 Free waves

As the wave pattern passes the rubber duck, the duck stays put.
Thewaterisn’tmovingforwardwiththewave.
2. The medium is not transported with the wave.
Figure d shows a series of water waves before it has reached a rub-
ber duck (left), having just passed the duck (middle) and having
progressed about a meter beyond the duck (right). The duck bobs
around its initial position, but is not carried along with the wave.
This shows that the water itself does not flow outward with the
wave. If it did, we could empty one end of a swimming pool simply
by kicking up waves! We must distinguish between the motion of
the medium (water in this case) and the motion of the wave pattern
through the medium. The medium vibrates; the wave progresses
through space.
self-checkA
Infiguree,youcandetecttheside-to-sidemotionofthespringbecause
the spring appears blurry. At a certain instant, represented by a single
photo, how would you describe the motion of the different parts of the
spring? Other than the flat parts, do any parts of the spring have zero
velocity? .Answer,p. 554
A worm example 1
The worm in the figure is moving to the right. The wave pattern,
a pulse consisting of a compressed area of its body, moves to
the left. In other words, the motion of the wave pattern is in the
opposite direction compared to the motion of the medium.
As the wave pulse goes by,
theribbontiedtothespringisnot
carried along. The motion of the
wave pattern is to the right, but
themedium(spring)ismovingup
anddown,nottotheright.
Wave motion 485

Surfing example 2
Theincorrectbeliefthatthemediummoveswiththewaveisoften
reinforced by garbled secondhand knowledge of surfing. Anyone
who has actually surfed knows that the front of the board pushes
thewatertothesides,creatingawake—thesurfercanevendrag
hishandthroughthewater,asinfiguref. Ifthewaterwasmoving
along with the wave and the surfer, this wouldn’t happen. The
surferiscarriedforwardbecauseforwardisdownhill,notbecause
of any forward flow of the water. If the water was flowing forward,
thenapersonfloatinginthewateruptoherneckwouldbecarried
Example 2. The surfer is
alongjustasquicklyassomeoneonasurfboard. Infact,itiseven
dragginghishandinthewater.
possible to surf down the back side of a wave, although the ride
wouldn’t last very long because the surfer and the wave would
quickly part company.
3. A wave’s velocity depends on the medium.
A material object can move with any velocity, and can be sped up
or slowed down by a force that increases or decreases its kinetic
energy. Not so with waves. The magnitude of a wave’s velocity
depends on the properties of the medium (and perhaps also on the
shape of the wave, for certain types of waves). Sound waves travel
at about 340 m/s in air, 1000 m/s in helium. If you kick up water
Example3: abreakingwave. waves in a pool, you will find that kicking harder makes waves that
are taller (and therefore carry more energy), not faster. The sound
waves from an exploding stick of dynamite carry a lot of energy,
but are no faster than any other waves. Thus although both waves
and physical objects carry energy as they move through space, the
energy of the wave relates to its amplitude, not to its speed.
In the following section we will give an example of the physical rela-
tionship between the wave speed and the properties of the medium.
Breaking waves example 3
The velocity of water waves increases with depth. The crest of a
wave travels faster than the trough, and this can cause the wave
to break.
Once a wave is created, the only reason its speed will change is if it
enters a di↵erent medium or if the properties of the medium change.
It is not so surprising that a change in medium can slow down a
Example 4. The boat has
wave, but the reverse can also happen. A sound wave traveling
runupagainstalimitonitsspeed
because it can’t climb over its through a helium balloon will slow down when it emerges into the
own wave. Dolphins get around air, but if it enters another balloon it will speed back up again!
the problem by leaping out of the Similarly, water waves travel more quickly over deeper water, so a
water.
wavewillslowdownasitpassesoveranunderwaterridge, butspeed
up again as it emerges into deeper water.
486 Chapter 19 Free waves

Hull speed example 4
The speeds of most boats, and of some surface-swimming ani-
mals, are limited by the fact that they make a wave due to their
motion through the water. The boat in figure h is going at the
same speed as its own waves, and can’t go any faster. No mat-
ter how hard the boat pushes against the water, it can’t make
the wave move ahead faster and get out of the way. The wave’s
speed depends only on the medium. Adding energy to the wave
doesn’t speed it up, it just increases its amplitude.
A water wave, unlike many other types of wave, has a speed that
depends on its shape: a broader wave moves faster. The shape
of the wave made by a boat tends to mold itself to the shape of
theboat’shull,soaboatwithalongerhullmakesabroaderwave
thatmovesfaster. Themaximumspeedofaboatwhosespeedis
limitedbythiseffectisthereforecloselyrelatedtothelengthofits
hull, and the maximum speed is called the hull speed. Sailboats
designed for racing are not just long and skinny to make them
more streamlined — they are also long so that their hull speeds
will be high.
Wave patterns
Circular and linear wave pat-
If the magnitude of a wave’s velocity vector is preordained, what terns.
about its direction? Waves spread out in all directions from every
point on the disturbance that created them. If the disturbance is
small, we may consider it as a single point, and in the case of water
waves the resulting wave pattern is the familiar circular ripple, i/1.
If, on the other hand, we lay a pole on the surface of the water
and wiggle it up and down, we create a linear wave pattern, i/2.
For a three-dimensional wave such as a sound wave, the analogous
patterns would be spherical waves and plane waves, j.
Infinitely many patterns are possible, but linear or plane waves are
often the simplest to analyze, because the velocity vector is in the
same direction no matter what part of the wave we look at. Since
all the velocity vectors are parallel to one another, the problem is
e↵ectively one-dimensional. Throughout this chapter and the next,
we will restrict ourselves mainly to wave motion in one dimension,
while not hesitating to broaden our horizons when it can be done
without too much complication.
Plane and spherical wave
patterns.
Wave motion 487

Discussion questions
A [seeabove]
B Sketchtwopositivewavepulsesonastringthatareoverlappingbut
notrightontopofeachother,anddrawtheirsuperposition. Dothesame
forapositivepulserunningintoanegativepulse.
C Atravelingwavepulseismovingtotherightonastring. Sketchthe
velocity vectors of the various parts of the string. Now do the same for a
pulsemovingtotheleft.
D In a spherical sound wave spreading out from a point, how would
theenergyofthewavefalloffwithdistance?
19.2 Waves on a string
So far you have learned some counterintuitive things about the be-
Hittingakeyonapianocausesa
havior of waves, but intuition can be trained. The first half of this
hammer to come up from under-
section aims to build your intuition by investigating a simple, one-
neath and hit a string (actually a
set of three strings). The result dimensional type of wave: a wave on a string. If you have ever
is a pair of pulses moving away stretched a string between the bottoms of two open-mouthed cans
fromthepointofimpact. to talk to a friend, you were putting this type of wave to work.
Stringed instruments are another good example. Although we usu-
ally think of a piano wire simply as vibrating, the hammer actually
strikes it quickly and makes a dent in it, which then ripples out in
both directions. Since this chapter is about free waves, not bounded
ones, we pretend that our string is infinitely long.
After the qualitative discussion, we will use simple approximations
to investigate the speed of a wave pulse on a string. This quick
A string is struck with a hammer,
1,andtwopulsesflyoff,2. and dirty treatment is then followed by a rigorous attack using the
methods of calculus, which may be skipped by the student who has
not studied calculus. How far you penetrate in this section is up to
you, and depends on your mathematical self-confidence. If you skip
some of the math, you should nevertheless absorb the significance
of the result, discussed on p. 492.
Intuitive ideas
Consider a string that has been struck, l/1, resulting in the creation
of two wave pulses, 2, one traveling to the left and one to the right.
Thisisanalogoustothewayripplesspreadoutinalldirectionsfrom
a splash in water, but on a one-dimensional string, “all directions”
becomes “both directions.”
We can gain insight by modeling the string as a series of masses con-
nectedbysprings. (Intheactualstringthemassandthespringiness
arebothcontributedbythemoleculesthemselves.) Ifwelookatvar-
iousmicroscopicportionsofthestring, therewillbesomeareasthat
A continuous string can be areflat,m/1,somethatareslopingbutnotcurved,2,andsomethat
modeled as a series of discrete are curved, 3 and 4. In example 1 it is clear that both the forces
massesconnectedbysprings. on the central mass cancel out, so it will not accelerate. The same
488 Chapter 19 Free waves