# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 508-515
############################################################

3 The figure shows one wavelength of a steady sinusoidal wave
traveling to the right along a string. Define a coordinate system
in which the positive x axis points to the right and the positive y
axis up, such that the flattened string would have y = 0. Copy
Problem3.
the figure, and label with y = 0 all the appropriate parts of the
string. Similarly, label with v = 0 all parts of the string whose
velocities are zero, and with a = 0 all parts whose accelerations
are zero. There is more than one point whose velocity is of the
greatest magnitude. Pick one of these, and indicate the direction of
its velocity vector. Do the same for a point having the maximum
magnitude of acceleration. Explain all your answers.
[Problem by Arnold Arons.]
4 (a) Find an equation for the relationship between the Doppler-
shifted frequency of a wave and the frequency of the original wave,
for the case of a stationary observer and a source moving directly
toward or away from the observer.
(b) Check that the units of your answer make sense.
(c) Check that the dependence on v makes sense.
s
5 Suggest a quantitative experiment to look for any deviation
fromtheprincipleofsuperpositionforsurfacewavesinwater. Make
it simple and practical.
6 The musical note middle C has a frequency of 262 Hz. What
are its period and wavelength? p
7 Singing that is o↵-pitch by more than about 1% sounds bad.
How fast would a singer have to be moving relative to the rest of
a band to make this much of a change in pitch due to the Doppler
e↵ect?
8 In section 19.2, we saw that the speed of waves on a string
depends on the ratio of T/µ, i.e., the speed of the wave is greater if
thestringisundermoretension, andlessifithasmoreinertia. This
is true in general: the speed of a mechanical wave always depends
on the medium’s inertia in relation to the restoring force (tension,
sti↵ness, resistance to compression,...). Based on these ideas, ex-
plain why the speed of sound in air is significantly greater on a hot
day, while the speed of sound in liquids and solids shows almost no
variation with temperature.
508 Chapter 19 Free waves

Across-sectionalviewofahumanbody,showingthevocaltract.
Chapter 20
Bounded waves
Speech is what separates humans most decisively from animals. No
other species can master syntax, and even though chimpanzees can
learnavocabularyofhandsigns, thereisanunmistakabledi↵erence
between a human infant and a baby chimp: starting from birth, the
human experiments with the production of complex speech sounds.
Since speech sounds are instinctive for us, we seldom think about
them consciously. How do we do control sound waves so skillfully?
Mostly we do it by changing the shape of a connected set of hollow
cavities in our chest, throat, and head. Somehow by moving the
boundaries of this space in and out, we can produce all the vowel
sounds. Up until now, we have been studying only those properties
of waves that can be understood as if they existed in an infinite,
openspace. Inthischapterweaddresswhathappenswhenawaveis
confined within a certain space, or when a wave pattern encounters
the boundary between two di↵erent media, as when a light wave
moving through air encounters a glass windowpane.
509

A diver photographed this fish,
and its reflection, from underwa-
ter. The reflection is the one on
top, and is formed by light waves
that went up to the surface of
thewater,butwerethenreflected
backdownintothewater.
20.1 Reflection, transmission, and absorption
Reflection and transmission
Soundwavescanechobackfromacli↵, andlightwavesarereflected
from the surface of a pond. We use the word reflection, normally
applied only to light waves in ordinary speech, to describe any such
case of a wave rebounding from a barrier. Figure b shows a circular
water wave being reflected from a straight wall. In this chapter,
we will concentrate mainly on reflection of waves that move in one
dimension, as in figure c.
Wave reflection does not surprise us. After all, a material object
such as a rubber ball would bounce back in the same way. But
waves are not objects, and there are some surprises in store.
First,onlypartofthewaveisusuallyreflected. Lookingoutthrough
a window, we see light waves that passed through it, but a person
standing outside would also be able to see her reflection in the glass.
A light wave that strikes the glass is partly reflected and partly
transmitted (passed) by the glass. The energy of the original wave
is split between the two. This is di↵erent from the behavior of the
rubber ball, which must go one way or the other, not both.
Second, consider what you see if you are swimming underwater and
you look up at the surface. You see your own reflection. This is
utterly counterintuitive, since we would expect the light waves to
burst forth to freedom in the wide-open air. A material projectile
shot up toward the surface would never rebound from the water-air
510 Chapter 20 Bounded waves

boundary! Figure a shows a similar example.
Whatisitaboutthedi↵erencebetweentwomediathatcauseswaves
to be partly reflected at the boundary between them? Is it their
density? Their chemical composition? Ultimately all that matters
is the speed of the wave in the two media. A wave is partially
reflected and partially transmitted at the boundary between media in
which it has di↵erent speeds. For example, the speed of light waves
in window glass is about 30% less than in air, which explains why
Circular water waves are re-
windows always make reflections. Figures d/1 and 2 show examples
flected from a boundary on the
of wave pulses being reflected at the boundary between two coil
top.
springs of di↵erent weights, in which the wave speed is di↵erent.
Reflectionssuchasbandc, whereawaveencountersamassivefixed
object, can usually be understood on the same basis as cases like
d/1 and 2 later in this section, where two media meet. Example c,
for instance, is like a more extreme version of example d/1. If the
heavy coil spring in d/1 was made heavier and heavier, it would end
up acting like the fixed wall to which the light spring in c has been
attached.
self-checkA
In figure c, the reflected pulse is upside-down, but its depth is just as
bigastheoriginalpulse’sheight. Howdoestheenergyofthereflected
pulsecomparewiththatoftheoriginal? .Answer,p. 555
Fish have internal ears. example 1
Why don’t fish have ear-holes? The speed of sound waves in
a fish’s body is not much different from their speed in water, so
sound waves are not strongly reflected from a fish’s skin. They
pass right through its body, so fish can have internal ears.
Whale songs traveling long distances example 2
Sound waves travel at drastically different speeds through rock,
water, and air. Whale songs are thus strongly reflected at both
the bottom and the surface. The sound waves can travel hun-
dreds of miles, bouncing repeatedly between the bottom and the
surface, and still be detectable. Sadly, noise pollution from ships
has nearly shut down this cetacean version of the internet.
Long-distance radio communication. example 3
Radio communication can occur between stations on opposite
sides of the planet. The mechanism is similar to the one ex-
plained in example 2, but the three media involved are the earth,
A wave on a spring, initially
the atmosphere, and the ionosphere.
traveling to the left, is reflected
fromthefixedend.
self-checkB
Sonar is a method for ships and submarines to detect each other by
producingsoundwavesandlisteningforechoes. Whatpropertieswould
anunderwaterobjecthavetohaveinordertobeinvisibletosonar? .
Answer,p. 555
Reflection, transmission, and absorption 511

The use of the word “reflection” naturally brings to mind the cre-
ation of an image by a mirror, but this might be confusing, because
we do not normally refer to “reflection” when we look at surfaces
thatarenotshiny. Nevertheless,reflectionishowweseethesurfaces
of all objects, not just polished ones. When we look at a sidewalk,
for example, we are actually seeing the reflecting of the sun from
the concrete. The reason we don’t see an image of the sun at our
feet is simply that the rough surface blurs the image so drastically.
1. A wave in the lighter spring, where the wave speed is greater,
travelstotheleftandisthenpartlyreflectedandpartlytransmittedatthe
boundary with the heavier coil spring, which has a lower wave speed.
The reflection is inverted. 2. A wave moving to the right in the heavier
spring is partly reflected at the boundary with the lighter spring. The
reflectionisuninverted.
512 Chapter 20 Bounded waves

Inverted and uninverted reflections
Notice how the pulse reflected back to the right in example d/1
comes back upside-down, whereas the one reflected back to the left
in 2 returns in its original upright form. This is true for other waves
as well. In general, there are two possible types of reflections, a
reflection back into a faster medium and a reflection back into a
slower medium. One type will always be an inverting reflection and
one noninverting.
It’s important to realize that when we discuss inverted and unin-
verted reflections on a string, we are talking about whether the
wave is flipped across the direction of motion (i.e., upside-down in
these drawings). The reflected pulse will always be reversed front
to back, as shown in figure e. This is because it is traveling in the 1. An uninverted reflection.
The reflected pulse is reversed
other direction. The leading edge of the pulse is what gets reflected
front to back, but is not upside-
first, so it is still ahead when it starts back to the left — it’s just
down. 2. An inverted reflection.
that “ahead” is now in the opposite direction.
The reflected pulse is reversed
both front to back and top to
Absorption
bottom.
So far we have tacitly assumed that wave energy remains as wave
energy,andisnotconvertedtoanyotherform. Ifthiswastrue,then
the world would become more and more full of sound waves, which
could never escape into the vacuum of outer space. In reality, any
mechanicalwaveconsistsofatravelingpatternofvibrationsofsome
physical medium, and vibrations of matter always produce heat, as
when you bend a coat-hangar back and forth and it becomes hot.
We can thus expect that in mechanical waves such as water waves,
sound waves, or waves on a string, the wave energy will gradually
be converted into heat. This is referred to as absorption.
The wave su↵ers a decrease in amplitude, as shown in figure f. The
decrease in amplitude amounts to the same fractional change for
each unit of distance covered. For example, if a wave decreases
from amplitude 2 to amplitude 1 over a distance of 1 meter, then A pulse traveling through a
highlyabsorptivemedium.
after traveling another meter it will have an amplitude of 1/2. That
is, the reduction in amplitude is exponential. This can be proven
as follows. By the principle of superposition, we know that a wave
of amplitude 2 must behave like the superposition of two identical
wavesofamplitude1. Ifasingleamplitude-1wavewoulddiedownto
amplitude 1/2 over a certain distance, then two amplitude-1 waves
superposed on top of one another to make amplitude 1+1 = 2 must
die down to amplitude 1/2+1/2 = 1 over the same distance.
self-checkC
As a wave undergoes absorption, it loses energy. Does this mean that
itslowsdown? .Answer,p. 555
In many cases, this frictional heating e↵ect is quite weak. Sound
waves in air, for instance, dissipate into heat extremely slowly, and
thesoundofchurchmusicinacathedralmayreverberateforasmuch
Reflection, transmission, and absorption 513

as 3 or 4 seconds before it becomes inaudible. During this time it
has traveled over a kilometer! Even this very gradual dissipation
of energy occurs mostly as heating of the church’s walls and by the
leaking of sound to the outside (where it will eventually end up as
heat). Under the right conditions (humid air and low frequency), a
sound wave in a straight pipe could theoretically travel hundreds of
kilometers before being noticeably attenuated.
In general, the absorption of mechanical waves depends a great
deal on the chemical composition and microscopic structure of the
medium. Ripples on the surface of antifreeze, for instance, die out
extremely rapidly compared to ripples on water. For sound waves
and surface waves in liquids and gases, what matters is the viscosity
of the substance, i.e., whether it flows easily like water or mercury
ormoresluggishlylikemolassesorantifreeze. Thisexplainswhyour
intuitive expectation of strong absorption of sound in water is incor-
rect. Water is a very weak absorber of sound (viz. whale songs and
sonar),andourincorrectintuitionarisesfromfocusingonthewrong
X-rays are light waves with a
property of the substance: water’s high density, which is irrelevant,
very high frequency. They are
rather than its low viscosity, which is what matters.
absorbed strongly by bones, but
weaklybyflesh. Light is an interesting case, since although it can travel through
matter, it is not itself a vibration of any material substance. Thus
we can look at the star Sirius, 1014 km away from us, and be as-
sured that none of its light was absorbed in the vacuum of outer
space during its 9-year journey to us. The Hubble Space Telescope
routinely observes light that has been on its way to us since the
early history of the universe, billions of years ago. Of course the
energy of light can be dissipated if it does pass through matter (and
the light from distant galaxies is often absorbed if there happen to
be clouds of gas or dust in between).
Soundproofing example 4
Typicalamateurmusicianssettingouttosoundprooftheirgarages
tend to think that they should simply cover the walls with the
densest possible substance. In fact, sound is not absorbed very
stronglyevenbypassingthroughseveralinchesofwood. Abetter
strategy for soundproofing is to create a sandwich of alternating
layers of materials in which the speed of sound is very different,
to encourage reflection.
Theclassicdesignisalternatinglayersoffiberglassandplywood.
The speed of sound in plywood is very high, due to its stiffness,
while its speed in fiberglass is essentially the same as its speed
in air. Both materials are fairly good sound absorbers, but sound
waves passing through a few inches of them are still not going
to be absorbed sufficiently. The point of combining them is that
a sound wave that tries to get out will be strongly reflected at
each of the fiberglass-plywood boundaries, and will bounce back
and forth many times like a ping pong ball. Due to all the back-
514 Chapter 20 Bounded waves