# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 467-472
############################################################

(2)Avibratingsystemresonatesatitsownnaturalfrequency.1 That
is, the amplitude of the steady-state response is greatest in propor-
tion to the amount of driving force when the driving force matches
the natural frequency of vibration.
An opera singer breaking a wine glass example 5
In order to break a wineglass by singing, an opera singer must
first tap the glass to find its natural frequency of vibration, and
then sing the same note back.
Collapse of the Nimitz Freeway in an earthquake example 6
I led off the chapter with the dramatic collapse of the Tacoma
Narrows Bridge, mainly because it was well documented by a
local physics professor, and an unknown person made a movie
of the collapse. The collapse of a section of the Nimitz Freeway
in Oakland, CA, during a 1989 earthquake is however a simpler
The collapsed section of the
example to analyze.
NimitzFreeway.
Anearthquakeconsistsofmanylow-frequencyvibrationsthatoc-
cur simultaneously, which is why it sounds like a rumble of inde-
terminate pitch rather than a low hum. The frequencies that we
can hear are not even the strongest ones; most of the energy is
in the form of vibrations in the range of frequencies from about 1
Hz to 10 Hz.
Now all the structures we build are resting on geological layers
of dirt, mud, sand, or rock. When an earthquake wave comes
along, the topmost layer acts like a system with a certain natural
frequency of vibration, sort of like a cube of jello on a plate being
shaken from side to side. The resonant frequency of the layer
depends on how stiff it is and also on how deep it is. The ill-
fated section of the Nimitz freeway was built on a layer of mud,
andanalysisbygeologistSusanE.HoughoftheU.S.Geological
Survey shows that the mud layer’s resonance was centered on
about 2.5 Hz, and had a width covering a range from about 1 Hz
to 4 Hz.
When the earthquake wave came along with its mixture of fre-
quencies,themudrespondedstronglytothosethatwerecloseto
its own natural 2.5 Hz frequency. Unfortunately, an engineering
analysisafterthequakeshowedthattheoverpassitselfhadares-
onantfrequencyof2.5Hzaswell! Themudrespondedstronglyto
the earthquake waves with frequencies close to 2.5 Hz, and the
bridge responded strongly to the 2.5 Hz vibrations of the mud,
causing sections of it to collapse.
Collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge example 7
Let’s now examine the more conceptually difficult case of the
Tacoma Narrows Bridge. The surprise here is that the wind was
Putting energy into vibrations 467

steady. If the wind was blowing at constant velocity, why did it
shake the bridge back and forth? The answer is a little compli-
cated. Basedonfilmfootageandafter-the-factwindtunnelexper-
iments, it appears that two different mechanisms were involved.
The first mechanism was the one responsible for the initial, rel-
atively weak vibrations, and it involved resonance. As the wind
moved over the bridge, it began acting like a kite or an airplane
wing. Asshowninthefigure,itestablishedswirlingpatternsofair
flow around itself, of the kind that you can see in a moving cloud
of smoke. As one of these swirls moved off of the bridge, there
was an abrupt change in air pressure, which resulted in an up or
down force on the bridge. We see something similar when a flag
flaps in the wind, except that the flag’s surface is usually verti-
cal. This back-and-forth sequence of forces is exactly the kind of
periodic driving force that would excite a resonance. The faster
thewind,themorequicklytheswirlswouldgetacrossthebridge,
andthehigherthefrequencyofthedrivingforcewouldbe. Atjust
the right velocity, the frequency would be the right one to excite
the resonance. The wind-tunnel models, however, show that the
patternofvibrationofthebridgeexcitedbythismechanismwould
have been a different one than the one that finally destroyed the
bridge.
The bridge was probably destroyed by a different mechanism, in
which its vibrations at its own natural frequency of 0.2 Hz set up
analternatingpatternofwindgustsintheairimmediatelyaround
it, which then increased the amplitude of the bridge’s vibrations.
This vicious cycle fed upon itself, increasing the amplitude of the
vibrations until the bridge finally collapsed.
As long as we’re on the subject of collapsing bridges, it is worth
bringing up the reports of bridges falling down when soldiers march-
ing over them happened to step in rhythm with the bridge’s natural
frequency of oscillation. This is supposed to have happened in 1831
in Manchester, England, and again in 1849 in Anjou, France. Many
modern engineers and scientists, however, are suspicious of the anal-
ysis of these reports. It is possible that the collapses had more to do
with poor construction and overloading than with resonance. The
Nimitz Freeway and Tacoma Narrows Bridge are far better docu-
mented, and occurred in an era when engineers’ abilities to analyze
the vibrations of a complex structure were much more advanced.
Emission and absorption of light waves by atoms example 8
Inaverythingas,theatomsaresufficientlyfarapartthattheycan
actasindividualvibratingsystems. Althoughthevibrationsareof
averystrangeandabstracttypedescribedbythetheoryofquan-
tum mechanics, they nevertheless obey the same basic rules as
ordinary mechanical vibrations. When a thin gas made of a cer-
tain element is heated, it emits light waves with certain specific
468 Chapter 18 Resonance

frequencies, which are like a fingerprint of that element. As with
allothervibrations,theseatomicvibrationsrespondmoststrongly
to a driving force that matches their own natural frequency. Thus
if we have a relatively cold gas with light waves of various fre-
quencies passing through it, the gas will absorb light at precisely
those frequencies at which it would emit light if heated.
(3) When a system is driven at resonance, the steady-state vibra-
tions have an amplitude that is proportional to Q.
This is fairly intuitive. The steady-state behavior is an equilibrium
between energy input from the driving force and energy loss due to
damping. A low-Q oscillator, i.e., one with strong damping, dumps
its energy faster, resulting in lower-amplitude steady-state motion.
self-checkC
Ifanoperasingerisshoppingforawineglassthatshecanimpressher
friendsbybreaking,whatshouldshelookfor? .Answer,p. 554
Piano strings ringing in sympathy with a sung note example 9
. A sufficiently loud musical note sung near a piano with the lid
raisedcancausethecorrespondingstringsinthepianotovibrate.
(A piano has a set of three strings for each note, all struck by the
same hammer.) Why would this trick be unlikely to work with a
violin?
.Ifyouhave heardthesoundofa violinbeingplucked(thepizzi-
cato effect), you know that the note dies away very quickly. In
otherwords,aviolin’sQismuchlowerthanapiano’s. Thismeans
that its resonances are much weaker in amplitude.
Our fourth and final fact about resonance is perhaps the most sur-
prising. Itgivesusawaytodeterminenumericallyhowwidearange
of driving frequencies will produce a strong response. As shown in
the graph, resonances do not suddenly fall o↵ to zero outside a cer-
tainfrequencyrange. Itisusualtodescribethewidthofaresonance
by its full width at half-maximum (FWHM) as illustrated in figure
g.
(4) The FWHM of a resonance is related to its Q and its resonant
frequency f by the equation
res
f
res
FWHM = .
Q
The definition of the full width at
(This equation is only a good approximation when Q is large.) halfmaximum.
Why? Itisnotimmediatelyobviousthatthereshouldbeanylogical
relationshipbetweenQandtheFWHM.Here’stheidea. Aswehave
Putting energy into vibrations 469

seen already, the reason why the response of an oscillator is smaller
away from resonance is that much of the driving force is being used
to make the system act as if it had a di↵erent k. Roughly speak-
ing, the half-maximum points on the graph correspond to the places
where the amount of the driving force being wasted in this way is
the same as the amount of driving force being used productively to
replace the energy being dumped out by the damping force. If the
damping force is strong, then a large amount of force is needed to
counteractit, andwecanwastequiteabitofdrivingforceonchang-
ing k before it becomes comparable to the damping force. If, on the
other hand, the damping force is weak, then even a small amount of
force being wasted on changing k will become significant in propor-
tion, and we cannot get very far from the resonant frequency before
the two are comparable.
Changing the pitch of a wind instrument example 10
. A saxophone player normally selects which note to play by
choosing a certain fingering, which gives the saxophone a cer-
tainresonantfrequency. Themusiciancanalso,however,change
the pitch significantly by altering the tightness of her lips. This
corresponds to driving the horn slightly off of resonance. If the
pitch can be altered by about 5% up or down (about one musi-
cal half-step) without too much effort, roughly what is the Q of a
saxophone?
. Five percent is the width on one side of the resonance, so the
full width is about 10%, FWHM / f = 0.1. This implies a Q
res
of about 10, i.e., once the musician stops blowing, the horn will
continuesoundingforabout10cyclesbeforeitsenergyfallsoffby
a factor of 535. (Blues and jazz saxophone players will typically
choose a mouthpiece that has a low Q, so that they can produce
thebluesypitch-slidestypicaloftheirstyle. “Legit,”i.e.,classically
oriented players, use a higher-Q setup because their style only
calls for enough pitch variation to produce a vibrato.)
Decay of a saxophone tone example 11
. If a typical saxophone setup has a Q of about 10, how long will
it take for a 100-Hz tone played on a baritone saxophone to die
downbyafactorof535inenergy,aftertheplayersuddenlystops
blowing?
. A Q of 10 means that it takes 10 cycles for the vibrations to die
down in energy by a factor of 535. Ten cycles at a frequency of
100 Hz would correspond to a time of 0.1 seconds, which is not
verylong. Thisiswhyasaxophonenotedoesn’t“ring”likeanote
played on a piano or an electric guitar.
Q of a radio receiver example 12
. A radio receiver used in the FM band needs to be tuned in to
within about 0.1 MHz for signals at about 100 MHz. What is its
Q?
470 Chapter 18 Resonance

.Q = f /FWHM = 1000. ThisisanextremelyhighQ compared
res
to most mechanical systems.
Q of a stereo speaker example 13
We have already given one reason why a stereo speaker should
havealowQ: otherwiseitwouldcontinueringingaftertheendof
the musical note on the recording. The second reason is that we
want it to be able to respond to a large range of frequencies.
Nuclear magnetic resonance example 14
If you have ever played with a magnetic compass, you have un- Example 14. 1. A compass
doubtedly noticed that if you shake it, it takes some time to settle needlevibratesabouttheequilib-
down, h/1. As it settles down, it acts like a damped oscillator of rium position under the influence
of the earth’s magnetic forces. 2.
thetypewehavebeendiscussing. Thecompassneedleissimply
The orientation of a proton’s spin
a small magnet, and the planet earth is a big magnet. The mag-
vibrates around its equilibrium
netic forces between them tend to bring the needle to an equilib-
direction under the influence of
rium position in which it lines up with the planet-earth-magnet. the magnetic forces coming from
the surrounding electrons and
EssentiallythesamephysicsliesbehindthetechniquecalledNu-
nuclei.
clear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). NMR is a technique used to
deducethemolecularstructureofunknownchemicalsubstances,
anditisalsousedformakingmedicalimagesoftheinsideofpeo-
ple’s bodies. If you ever have an NMR scan, they will actually tell
you you are undergoing “magnetic resonance imaging” or “MRI,”
because people are scared of the word “nuclear.” In fact, the
nuclei being referred to are simply the non-radioactive nuclei of
atoms found naturally in your body.
Here’s how NMR works. Your body contains large numbers of
hydrogen atoms, each consisting of a small, lightweight electron
orbiting around a large, heavy proton. That is, the nucleus of a
hydrogen atom is just one proton. A proton is always spinning
on its own axis, and the combination of its spin and its electrical
charge causes it to behave like a tiny magnet. The principle is
identical to that of an electromagnet, which consists of a coil of
wire through which electrical charges pass; the circling motion of
A member of the author’s
thechargesinthecoilofwiremakesitmagnetic,andinthesame
family, who turned out to be
way,thecirclingmotionoftheproton’schargemakesitmagnetic. healthy.
Now a proton in one of your body’s hydrogen atoms finds itself
surroundedbymanyotherwhirling,electricallychargedparticles:
itsownelectron,plustheelectronsandnucleioftheothernearby
atoms. These neighbors act like magnets, and exert magnetic
forcesontheproton,h/2. Thek ofthevibratingprotonissimplya
measure of the total strength of these magnetic forces. Depend-
ing on the structure of the molecule in which the hydrogen atom
finds itself, there will be a particular set of magnetic forces acting
on the proton and a particular value of k. The NMR apparatus
bombards the sample with radio waves, and if the frequency of
A three-dimensional computer
the radio waves matches the resonant frequency of the proton,
reconstruction of the shape of a
the proton will absorb radio-wave energy strongly and oscillate
human brain, based on magnetic
resonancedata.
Putting energy into vibrations 471