# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 363-369
############################################################

pool notices a case where her cue ball hits an initially stationary
ball and stops dead. “Wow, what a good trick,” she thinks. “I bet
I could never do that again in a million years.” But she tries again,
and finds that she can’t help doing it even if she doesn’t want to.
Luckily she has just learned about collisions in her physics course.
Once she has written down the equations for conservation of energy
andnolossofkineticenergy, shereallydoesn’thavetocompletethe
algebra. She knows that she has two equations in two unknowns, so
there must be a well-defined solution. Once she has seen the result
of one such collision, she knows that the same thing must happen
every time. The same thing would happen with colliding marbles or
croquet balls. It doesn’t matter if the masses or velocities are di↵er-
ent, because that just multiplies both equations by some constant
factor.
The discovery of the neutron
This was the type of reasoning employed by James Chadwick in his
1932 discovery of the neutron. At the time, the atom was imag-
ined to be made out of two types of fundamental particles, protons
and electrons. The protons were far more massive, and clustered
together in the atom’s core, or nucleus. Attractive electrical forces
caused the electrons to orbit the nucleus in circles, in much the
same way that gravitational forces kept the planets from cruising
out of the solar system. Experiments showed that the helium nu-
cleus, for instance, exerted exactly twice as much electrical force on
anelectronasanucleusofhydrogen,thesmallestatom,andthiswas
explained by saying that helium had two protons to hydrogen’s one.
The trouble was that according to this model, helium would have
two electrons and two protons, giving it precisely twice the mass of
a hydrogen atom with one of each. In fact, helium has about four
times the mass of hydrogen.
Chadwick suspected that the helium nucleus possessed two addi-
tional particles of a new type, which did not participate in electrical
forcesatall,i.e.,wereelectricallyneutral. Iftheseparticleshadvery
nearly the same mass as protons, then the four-to-one mass ratio of
helium and hydrogen could be explained. In 1930, a new type of
radiation was discovered that seemed to fit this description. It was
electricallyneutral,andseemedtobecomingfromthenucleioflight
elements that had been exposed to other types of radiation. At this
time, however, reportsofnewtypesofparticleswereadimeadozen,
and most of them turned out to be either clusters made of previ-
ously known particles or else previously known particles with higher
energies. Many physicists believed that the “new” particle that had
attractedChadwick’sinterestwasreallyapreviouslyknownparticle
called a gamma ray, which was electrically neutral. Since gamma
rays have no mass, Chadwick decided to try to determine the new
particle’s mass and see if it was nonzero and approximately equal
Collisions in one dimension 363

to the mass of a proton.
Unfortunately a subatomic particle is not something you can just
put on a scale and weigh. Chadwick came up with an ingenious
solution. The masses of the nuclei of the various chemical elements
were already known, and techniques had already been developed for
measuring the speed of a rapidly moving nucleus. He therefore set
out to bombard samples of selected elements with the mysterious
new particles. When a direct, head-on collision occurred between
a mystery particle and the nucleus of one of the target atoms, the
nucleus would be knocked out of the atom, and he would measure
its velocity.
Chadwick’s subatomic pool table. A disk of the naturally occurring
metal polonium provides a source of radiation capable of kicking neu-
trons out of the beryllium nuclei. The type of radiation emitted by the
polonium is easily absorbed by a few mm of air, so the air has to be
pumpedoutoftheleft-handchamber. Theneutrons,Chadwick’smystery
particles, penetrate matter far more readily, and fly out through the wall
andintothechamberontheright,whichisfilledwithnitrogenorhydrogen
gas. When a neutron collides with a nitrogen or hydrogen nucleus, it
kicks it out of its atom at high speed, and this recoiling nucleus then rips
apart thousands of other atoms of the gas. The result is an electrical
pulsethatcanbedetectedinthewireontheright. Physicistshadalready
calibratedthistypeofapparatussothattheycouldtranslatethestrength
of the electrical pulse into the velocity of the recoiling nucleus. The
wholeapparatusshowninthefigurewouldfitinthepalmofyourhand,in
dramaticcontrasttotoday’sgiantparticleaccelerators.
Suppose, forinstance, thatwebombardasampleofhydrogenatoms
with the mystery particles. Since the participants in the collision
are fundamental particles, there is no way for kinetic energy to be
converted into heat or any other form of energy, and Chadwick thus
had two equations in three unknowns:
equation #1: conservation of momentum
equation #2: no loss of kinetic energy
364 Chapter 14 Conservation of momentum

unknown #1: mass of the mystery particle
unknown #2: initial velocity of the mystery particle
unknown #3: final velocity of the mystery particle
The number of unknowns is greater than the number of equations,
so there is no unique solution. But by creating collisions with nuclei
of another element, nitrogen, he gained two more equations at the
expense of only one more unknown:
equation #3: conservation of momentum in the new collision
equation #4: no loss of kinetic energy in the new collision
unknown #4: final velocity of the mystery particle in the new col-
lision
He was thus able to solve for all the unknowns, including the mass
of the mystery particle, which was indeed within 1% of the mass
of a proton. He named the new particle the neutron, since it is
electrically neutral.
Discussion question
A Goodpoolplayerslearntomakethecueballspin,whichcancause
itnottostopdeadinahead-oncollisionwithastationaryball. Ifthisdoes
not violate the laws of physics, what hidden assumption was there in the
exampleabove?
14.3 ? Relationship of momentum to the
center of mass
In this multiple-flash photograph,
we see the wrench from above
as it flies through the air, rotat-
ingasitgoes. Itscenterofmass,
markedwiththeblackcross,trav-
elsalongastraightline,unlikethe
otherpointsonthewrench,which
executeloops.
We have already discussed the idea of the center of mass on p. 67,
but using the concept of momentum we can now find a mathemati-
cal method for defining the center of mass, explain why the motion
of an object’s center of mass usually exhibits simpler motion than
any other point, and gain a very simple and powerful way of under-
standing collisions.
The first step is to realize that the center of mass concept can be ap-
plied to systems containing more than one object. Even something
like a wrench, which we think of as one object, is really made of
many atoms. The center of mass is particularly easy to visualize in
the case shown on the left, where two identical hockey pucks collide.
? Relationship of momentum to the center of mass 365

It is clear on grounds of symmetry that their center of mass must
be at the midpoint between them. After all, we previously defined
the center of mass as the balance point, and if the two hockey pucks
were joined with a very lightweight rod whose own mass was neg-
ligible, they would obviously balance at the midpoint. It doesn’t
matter that the hockey pucks are two separate objects. It is still
true that the motion of their center of mass is exceptionally simple,
just like that of the wrench’s center of mass.
Thexcoordinateofthehockeypucks’centerofmassisthusgivenby
x = (x +x )/2,i.e.,thearithmeticaverageoftheirxcoordinates.
cm 1 2
Why is its motion so simple? It has to do with conservation of
momentum. Since the hockey pucks are not being acted on by any
net external force, they constitute a closed system, and their total
momentum is conserved. Their total momentum is
mv +mv = m(v +v )
1 2 1 2
Two hockey pucks collide.  x 1  x 2
= m +
Their mutual center of mass  t  t
✓ ◆
traces the straight path shown by m
=  (x +x )
thedashedline.  t 1 2
2 x
cm
= m
 t
= m v
total cm
In other words, the total momentum of the system is the same as
if all its mass was concentrated at the center of mass point. Since
the total momentum is conserved, the x component of the center of
mass’s velocity vector cannot change. The same is also true for the
other components, so the center of mass must move along a straight
line at constant speed.
Theaboverelationshipbetweenthetotalmomentumandthemotion
of the center of mass applies to any system, even if it is not closed.
total momentum related to center of mass motion
Thetotalmomentumofanysystemisrelatedtoitstotalmass
and the velocity of its center of mass by the equation
p = m v .
total total cm
What about a system containing objects with unequal masses, or
containing more than two objects? The reasoning above can be
generalized to a weighted average
m x +m x +...
1 1 2 2
x = ,
cm
m +m +...
1 2
with similar equations for the y and z coordinates.
366 Chapter 14 Conservation of momentum

Momentum in different frames of reference
Absolute motion is supposed to be undetectable, i.e., the laws of
physics are supposed to be equally valid in all inertial frames of
reference. If we first calculate some momenta in one frame of ref-
erence and find that momentum is conserved, and then rework the
whole problem in some other frame of reference that is moving with
respect to the first, the numerical values of the momenta will all
be di↵erent. Even so, momentum will still be conserved. All that
matters is that we work a single problem in one consistent frame of
reference.
One way of proving this is to apply the equation p =
total
m v . If the velocity of frame B relative to frame A is v ,
total cm BA
then the only e↵ect of changing frames of reference is to change
v from its original value to v + v . This adds a constant
cm cm BA
onto the momentum vector, which has no e↵ect on conservation of
momentum.
The center of mass frame of reference
A particularly useful frame of reference in many cases is the frame Moving your head so that
you are always looking down
that moves along with the center of mass, called the center of mass
from right above the center of
(c.m.) frame. In this frame, the total momentum is zero. The
mass, you observe the collision
following examples show how the center of mass frame can be a
of the two hockey pucks in the
powerful tool for simplifying our understanding of collisions.
centerofmassframe.
A collision of pool balls viewed in the c.m. frame example 12
If you move your head so that your eye is always above the point
halfway in between the two pool balls, you are viewing things in
thecenterofmassframe. Inthisframe,theballscometowardthe
center of mass at equal speeds. By symmetry, they must there-
forerecoilatequalspeedsalongthelinesonwhichtheyentered.
Since the balls have essentially swapped paths in the center of
massframe, thesamemustalsobetrueinanyotherframe. This
is the same result that required laborious algebra to prove previ-
ously without the concept of the center of mass frame.
The slingshot effect viewed
The slingshot effect example 13 in the sun’s frame of reference.
It is a counterintuitive fact that a spacecraft can pick up speed Jupiter is moving to the left, and
thecollisionishead-on.
by swinging around a planet, if it arrives in the opposite direction
compared to the planet’s motion. Although there is no physical
contact, we treat the encounter as a one-dimensional collision,
and analyze it in the center of mass frame. Figure j shows such
a “collision,” with a space probe whipping around Jupiter. In the
sun’s frame of reference, Jupiter is moving.
What about the center of mass frame? Since Jupiter is so much
more massive than the spacecraft, the center of mass is essen-
The slingshot viewed in the
tially fixed at Jupiter’s center, and Jupiter has zero velocity in the
frameofthecenterofmassofthe
center of mass frame, as shown in figure k. The c.m. frame is Jupiter-spacecraftsystem.
moving to the left compared to the sun-fixed frame used in j, so
? Relationship of momentum to the center of mass 367

the spacecraft’s initial velocity is greater in this frame.
Thingsaresimplerinthecenterofmassframe,becauseitismore
symmetric. In the complicated sun-fixed frame, the incoming leg
of the encounter is rapid, because the two bodies are rushing to-
ward each other, while their separation on the outbound leg is
more gradual, because Jupiter is trying to catch up. In the c.m.
frame, Jupiter is sitting still, and there is perfect symmetry be-
tween the incoming and outgoing legs, so by symmetry we have
v = v . Going back to the sun-fixed frame, the spacecraft’s
1f 1i
 
final velocity is increased by the frames’ motion relative to each
other. In the sun-fixed frame, the spacecraft’s velocity has in-
creased greatly.
The result can also be understood in terms of work and energy.
InJupiter’sframe,Jupiterisnotdoinganyworkonthespacecraft
as it rounds the back of the planet, because the motion is per-
pendicular to the force. But in the sun’s frame, the spacecraft’s
velocityvectoratthesamemomenthasalargecomponenttothe
left, so Jupiter is doing work on it.
Discussion questions
A Makeupanumericalexampleoftwounequalmassesmovinginone
dimension at constant velocity, and verify the equation p = m v
total total cm
overatimeintervalofonesecond.
B A more massive tennis racquet or baseball bat makes the ball fly
off faster. Explain why this is true, using the center of mass frame. For
simplicity, assume that the racquet or bat is simply sitting still before the
collision, and that the hitter’s hands do not make any force large enough
tohaveasignificanteffectovertheshortdurationoftheimpact.
14.4 Momentum transfer
The rate of change of momentum
As with conservation of energy, we need a way to measure and cal-
culate the transfer of momentum into or out of a system when the
system is not closed. In the case of energy, the answer was rather
complicated, and entirely di↵erent techniques had to be used for
measuringthetransferofmechanicalenergy(work)andthetransfer
of heat by conduction. For momentum, the situation is far simpler.
In the simplest case, the system consists of a single object acted on
by a constant external force. Since it is only the object’s velocity
that can change, not its mass, the momentum transferred is
 p = m v,
whichwiththehelpofa = F/mandtheconstant-accelerationequa-
tion a =  v/ t becomes
 p = ma t
= F t.
368 Chapter 14 Conservation of momentum