# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 278-289
############################################################

15 Astronomers have detected a solar system consisting of three
planets orbiting the star Upsilon Andromedae. The planets have
been named b, c, and d. Planet b’s average distance from the star
is 0.059 A.U., and planet c’s average distance is 0.83 A.U., where an
astronomical unit or A.U. is defined as the distance from the Earth
to the sun. For technical reasons, it is possible to determine the
ratios of the planets’ masses, but their masses cannot presently be
determined in absolute units. Planet c’s mass is 3.0 times that of
planet b. Compare the star’s average gravitational force on planet
c with its average force on planet b. [Based on a problem by Arnold
Arons.] . Solution, p. 544
16 Some communications satellites are in orbits called geosyn-
chronous: the satellite takes one day to orbit the earth from west
to east, so that as the earth spins, the satellite remains above the
same point on the equator. What is such a satellite’s altitude above
the surface of the earth? . Solution, p. 544
17 As discussed in more detail in example 3 on p. 390, tidal
interactions with the earth are causing the moon’s orbit to grow
gradually larger. Laser beams bounced o↵ of a mirror left on the
moon by astronauts have allowed a measurement of the moon’s rate
of recession, which is about 4 cm per year. This means that the
gravitational force acting between earth and moon is decreasing.
By what fraction does the force decrease with each 27-day orbit?
[Based on a problem by Arnold Arons.]
. Hint, p. 534 . Solution, p. 545
18 Suppose that we inhabited a universe in which, instead of
Newton’s law of gravity, we had F = kpm m /r2, where k is some
1 2
constant with di↵erent units than G. (The force is still attrac-
tive.) However, we assume that a = F/m and the rest of Newtonian
physics remains true, and we use a = F/m to define our mass scale,
so that, e.g., a mass of 2 kg is one which exhibits half the accelera-
tion when the same force is applied to it as to a 1 kg mass.
(a) Is this new law of gravity consistent with Newton’s third law?
(b) Suppose you lived in such a universe, and you dropped two un-
equal masses side by side. What would happen?
(c) Numerically, suppose a 1.0-kg object falls with an acceleration
of 10 m/s2. What would be the acceleration of a rain drop with a
mass of 0.1 g? Would you want to go out in the rain?
(d) If a falling object broke into two unequal pieces while it fell,
what would happen?
(e) Invent a law of gravity that results in behavior that is the op-
posite of what you found in part b. [Based on a problem by Arnold
Arons.]
278 Chapter 10 Gravity

19 (a) A certain vile alien gangster lives on the surface of an
asteroid, where his weight is 0.20 N. He decides he needs to lose
weightwithoutreducinghisconsumptionofprincesses, sohe’sgoing
to move to a di↵erent asteroid where his weight will be 0.10 N. The
real estate agent’s database has asteroids listed by mass, however,
not by surface gravity. Assuming that all asteroids are spherical
and have the same density, how should the mass of his new asteroid
compare with that of his old one?
(b) Jupiter’s mass is 318 times the Earth’s, and its gravity is about
twice Earth’s. Is this consistent with the results of part a? If not,
how do you explain the discrepancy? . Solution, p. 545
20 Where would an object have to be located so that it would
experience zero total gravitational force from the earth and moon?
p
21 The planet Uranus has a mass of 8.68 1025 kg and a radius
⇥
of 2.56 104 km. The figure shows the relative sizes of Uranus and
⇥
Earth.
(a) Compute the ratio g /g , where g is the strength of the grav-
U E U
itational field at the surface of Uranus and g is the corresponding
E
quantity at the surface of the Earth. p
(b) What is surprising about this result? How do you explain it?
Problem21.
22 The International Space Station orbits at an average altitude
of about 370 km above sea level. Compute the value of g at that
altitude. p
Problems 279

Problem 23: New Horizons at
its closest approach to Jupiter.
(Jupiter’s four largest moons are
shown for illustrative purposes.)
Themassesare:
sun: 1.9891 1030 kg
⇥
Jupiter: 1.8986 1027 kg
⇥
NewHorizons: 465.0kg
23 On Feb. 28, 2007, the New Horizons space probe, on its way
to a 2015 flyby of Pluto, passed by the planet Jupiter for a gravity-
assisted maneuver that increased its speed and changed its course.
Thedashedlineinthefigureshowsthespacecraft’strajectory,which
iscurvedbecauseofthreeforces: theforceoftheexhaustgasesfrom
the probe’s own engines, the sun’s gravitational force, and Jupiter’s
gravitational force. Find the magnitude of the total gravitational
force acting on the probe. You will find that the sun’s force is much
smaller than Jupiter’s, so that the magnitude of the total force is
determined almost entirely by Jupiter’s force. However, this is a
high-precision problem, and you will find that the total force is
slightly di↵erent from Jupiter’s force. p
24 Onanairlessbodysuchasthemoon, thereisnoatmospheric
friction, so it should be possible for a satellite to orbit at a very low
altitude, just high enough to keep from hitting the mountains. (a)
Suppose that such a body is a smooth sphere of uniform density
⇢ and radius r. Find the velocity required for a ground-skimming
orbit. p
(b)Atypicalasteroidhasadensityofabout2g/cm3,i.e.,twicethat
of water. (This is a lot lower than the density of the earth’s crust,
probably indicating that the low gravity is not enough to compact
the material very tightly, leaving lots of empty space inside.) Sup-
pose that it is possible for an astronaut in a spacesuit to jump at
2 m/s. Find the radius of the largest asteroid on which it would be
possible to jump into a ground-skimming orbit. p
280 Chapter 10 Gravity

25 The figure shows a region of outer space in which two stars
have exploded, leaving behind two overlapping spherical shells of
gas, which we assume to remain at rest. The figure is a cross-
section in a plane containing the shells’ centers. A space probe is
released with a very small initial speed at the point indicated by
the arrow, initially moving in the direction indicated by the dashed
line. Without any further information, predict as much as possible
about the path followed by the probe and its changes in speed along
that path. ?
Problem25.
26 Approximate the earth’s density as being constant. (a) Find
the gravitational field at a point P inside the earth and half-way
between the center and the surface. Express your result as a ratio
g /g relative to the field we experience at the surface. (b) As a
P S
check on your answer, make sure that the same reasoning leads to
a reasonable result when the fraction 1/2 is replaced by the value 0
(P being the earth’s center) or the value 1 (P being a point on the
surface).
Problems 281

27 The earth is divided into solid inner core, a liquid outer core,
and a plastic mantle. Physical properties such as density change
discontinuously at the boundaries between one layer and the next.
Although the density is not completely constant within each region,
we will approximate it as being so for the purposes of this problem.
(We neglect the crust as well.) Let R be the radius of the earth
as a whole and M its mass. The following table gives a model of
some properties of the three layers, as determined by methods such
as the observation of earthquake waves that have propagated from
one side of the planet to the other.
region outer radius/R mass/M
mantle 1 0.69
outer core 0.55 0.29
inner core 0.19 0.017
The boundary between the mantle and the outer core is referred to
astheGutenbergdiscontinuity. Letg bethestrengthoftheearth’s
s
gravitational field at its surface and g its value at the Gutenberg
G
discontinuity. Find g /g . p
G s
282 Chapter 10 Gravity

Exercise 10: The shell theorem
This exercise is an approximate numerical test of the shell theorem. There are seven masses
A-G, each being one kilogram. Masses A-F, each one meter from the center, form a shape like
two Egyptian pyramids joined at their bases; this is a rough approximation to a six-kilogram
spherical shell of mass. Mass G is five meters from the center of the main group. The class will
divide into six groups and split up the work required in order to calculate the vector sum of the
six gravitational forces exerted on mass G. Depending on the size of the class, more than one
group may be assigned to deal with the contribution of the same mass to the total force, and
the redundant groups can check each other’s results.
1. Discuss as a class what can be done to simplify the task of calculating the vector sum, and
how to organize things so that each group can work in parallel with the others.
2. Each group should write its results on the board in units of piconewtons, retaining five
significant figures of precision. Everyone will need to use the same value for the gravitational
constant, G = 6.6743 10 11 N m2/kg2.
 
⇥ ·
3. The class will determine the vector sum and compare with the result that would be obtained
with the shell theorem.
Exercise 10: The shell theorem 283

Conservation laws
284

286

In July of 1994, Comet Shoemaker-Levy struck the planet Jupiter, de-
positing 7 1022 joules of energy, and incidentally giving rise to a series
⇥
of Hollywood movies in which our own planet is threatened by an impact
by a comet or asteroid. There is evidence that such an impact caused
the extinction of the dinosaurs. Left: Jupiter’s gravitational force on the
near side of the comet was greater than on the far side, and this differ-
ence in force tore up the comet into a string of fragments. Two separate
telescopeimageshavebeencombinedtocreatetheillusionofapointof
view just behind the comet. (The colored fringes at the edges of Jupiter
areartifactsoftheimagingsystem.) Top: Aseriesofimagesoftheplume
ofsuperheatedgaskickedupbytheimpactofoneofthefragments. The
plumeisaboutthesizeofNorthAmerica. Bottom: Animageafterallthe
impactswereover,showingthedamagedone.
Chapter 11
Conservation of energy
11.1 The search for a perpetual motion
machine
Don’t underestimate greed and laziness as forces for progress. Mod-
ern chemistry was born from the collision of lust for gold with dis-
taste for the hard work of finding it and digging it up. Failed e↵orts
by generations of alchemists to turn lead into gold led finally to the
conclusion that it could not be done: certain substances, the chem-
287

ical elements, are fundamental, and chemical reactions can neither
increase nor decrease the amount of an element such as gold.
Now flash forward to the early industrial age. Greed and laziness
have created the factory, the train, and the ocean liner, but in each
of these is a boiler room where someone gets sweaty shoveling the
coal to fuel the steam engine. Generations of inventors have tried to
createamachine,calledaperpetualmotionmachine,thatwouldrun
forever without fuel. Such a machine is not forbidden by Newton’s
laws of motion, which are built around the concepts of force and
inertia. Forceisfree, andcanbemultipliedindefinitelywithpulleys,
gears, or levers. The principle of inertia seems even to encourage
the belief that a cleverly constructed machine might not ever run
down.
Figures a and b show two of the innumerable perpetual motion
machines that have been proposed. The reason these two examples
don’t work is not much di↵erent from the reason all the others have
failed. Consider machine a. Even if we assume that a properly
shaped ramp would keep the ball rolling smoothly through each
cycle, friction would always be at work. The designer imagined that
the machine would repeat the same motion over and over again, so
The magnet draws the ball that every time it reached a given point its speed would be exactly
to the top of the ramp, where it
the same as the last time. But because of friction, the speed would
falls through the hole and rolls
actually be reduced a little with each cycle, until finally the ball
backtothebottom.
would no longer be able to make it over the top.
Frictionhasawayofcreepingintoallmovingsystems. Therotating
earthmightseemlikeaperfectperpetualmotionmachine, sinceitis
isolatedinthevacuumofouterspacewithnothingtoexertfrictional
forces on it. But in fact our planet’s rotation has slowed drastically
since it first formed, and the earth continues to slow its rotation,
making today just a little longer than yesterday. The very subtle
sourceoffrictionisthetides. Themoon’sgravityraisesbulgesinthe
earth’s oceans, and as the earth rotates the bulges progress around
theplanet. Wherethebulgesencounterland,thereisfriction,which
slows the earth’s rotation very gradually.
11.2 Energy
As the wheel spins clock-
wise, the flexible arms sweep
Theanalysisbasedonfrictionissomewhatsuperficial,however. One
aroundandbendandunbend. By
could understand friction perfectly well and yet imagine the follow-
dropping off its ball on the ramp,
ing situation. Astronauts bring back a piece of magnetic ore from
the arm is supposed to make
the moon which does not behave like ordinary magnets. A normal
itself lighter and easier to lift over
the top. Picking its own ball back bar magnet, c/1, attracts a piece of iron essentially directly toward
up again on the right, it helps to it, and has no left- or right-handedness. The moon rock, however,
pulltherightsidedown. exerts forces that form a whirlpool pattern around it, 2. NASA
goes to a machine shop and has the moon rock put in a lathe and
machined down to a smooth cylinder, 3. If we now release a ball
bearing on the surface of the cylinder, the magnetic force whips it
288 Chapter 11 Conservation of energy