# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 158-163
############################################################

.Solvedproblem: Moreaboutexample2 page183,problem20
.Solvedproblem: Whydiditaccelerate? page183,problem18
Discussion questions
A When you fire a gun, the exploding gases push outward in all
directions, causing the bullet to accelerate down the barrel. What third-
law pairs are involved? [Hint: Remember that the gases themselves are
anobject.]
B Tam Anh grabs Sarah by the hand and tries to pull her. She tries
to remain standing without moving. A student analyzes the situation as
follows. “If Tam Anh’s force on Sarah is greater than her force on him,
he can get her to move. Otherwise, she’ll be able to stay where she is.”
What’swrongwiththisanalysis?
C You hit a tennis ball against a wall. Explain any and all incorrect
ideas in the following description of the physics involved: “According to
Newton’s third law, there has to be a force opposite to your force on the
ball. Theoppositeforceistheball’smass,whichresistsacceleration,and
alsoairresistance.”
5.2 Classification and behavior of forces
One of the most basic and important tasks of physics is to classify
the forces of nature. I have already referred informally to “types” of
forces such as friction, magnetism, gravitational forces, and so on.
Classification systems are creations of the human mind, so there is
alwayssomedegreeofarbitrarinessinthem. Foronething, thelevel
of detail that is appropriate for a classification system depends on
whatyou’retryingtofindout. Somelinguists,the“lumpers,”liketo
emphasize the similarities among languages, and a few extremists
have even tried to find signs of similarities between words in lan-
guages as di↵erent as English and Chinese, lumping the world’s lan-
guages into only a few large groups. Other linguists, the “splitters,”
might be more interested in studying the di↵erences in pronuncia-
tion between English speakers in New York and Connecticut. The
splitters call the lumpers sloppy, but the lumpers say that science
isn’t worthwhile unless it can find broad, simple patterns within the
seemingly complex universe.
Scientific classification systems are also usually compromises be-
tween practicality and naturalness. An example is the question of
how to classify flowering plants. Most people think that biological
classification is about discovering new species, naming them, and
classifying them in the class-order-family-genus-species system ac-
cording to guidelines set long ago. In reality, the whole system is in
a constant state of flux and controversy. One very practical way of
classifying flowering plants is according to whether their petals are
separateorjoinedintoatubeorcone—thecriterionissoclearthat
it can be applied to a plant seen from across the street. But here
practicalityconflictswithnaturalness. Forinstance,thebegoniahas
158 Chapter 5 Analysis of forces

separate petals and the pumpkin has joined petals, but they are so
similar in so many other ways that they are usually placed within
the same order. Some taxonomists have come up with classification
criteria that they claim correspond more naturally to the apparent
relationships among plants, without having to make special excep-
tions, but these may be far less practical, requiring for instance the
examination of pollen grains under an electron microscope.
Inphysics, therearetwomainsystemsofclassificationforforces.
At this point in the course, you are going to learn one that is very
practical and easy to use, and that splits the forces up into a rel-
atively large number of types: seven very common ones that we’ll
discuss explicitly in this chapter, plus perhaps ten less important
ones such as surface tension, which we will not bother with right
now.
Physicists, however, are obsessed with finding simple patterns,
so recognizing as many as fifteen or twenty types of forces strikes
them as distasteful and overly complex. Since about the year 1900,
h/A scientific classification
physicshasbeenonanaggressiveprogramtodiscoverwaysinwhich system.
these many seemingly di↵erent types of forces arise from a smaller
number of fundamental ones. For instance, when you press your
handstogether,theforcethatkeepsthemfrompassingthrougheach
other may seem to have nothing to do with electricity, but at the
atomic level, it actually does arise from electrical repulsion between
atoms. By about 1950, all the forces of nature had been explained
as arising from four fundamental types of forces at the atomic and
nuclear level, and the lumping-together process didn’t stop there.
By the 1960’s the length of the list had been reduced to three, and
some theorists even believe that they may be able to reduce it to
two or one. Although the unification of the forces of nature is one of
the most beautiful and important achievements of physics, it makes
much more sense to start this course with the more practical and
easy system of classification. The unified system of four forces will
be one of the highlights of the end of your introductory physics
sequence.
The practical classification scheme which concerns us now can
be laid out in the form of the tree shown in figure i. The most
specific types of forces are shown at the tips of the branches, and
it is these types of forces that are referred to in the POFOSTITO
mnemonic. For example, electrical and magnetic forces belong to
the same general group, but Newton’s third law would never relate
an electrical force to a magnetic force.
Thebroadestdistinctionisthatbetweencontactandnoncontact
forces, which has been discussed in ch. 4. Among the contact forces,
we distinguish between those that involve solids only and those that
have to do with fluids, a term used in physics to include both gases
and liquids.
Section 5.2 Classification and behavior of forces 159

i/Apracticalclassificationschemeforforces.
It should not be necessary to memorize this diagram by rote.
It is better to reinforce your memory of this system by calling to
mind your commonsense knowledge of certain ordinary phenomena.
For instance, we know that the gravitational attraction between us
and the planet earth will act even if our feet momentarily leave the
ground, and that although magnets have mass and are a↵ected by
gravity, most objects that have mass are nonmagnetic.
Hitting a wall example 4
. A bullet, flying horizontally, hits a steel wall. What type of force
is there between the bullet and the wall?
. Starting at the bottom of the tree, we determine that the force
is a contact force, because it only occurs once the bullet touches
the wall. Both objects are solid. The wall forms a vertical plane.
Ifthenoseofthebulletwassomeshapelikeasphere,youmight
imagine that it would only touch the wall at one point. Realisti-
cally, however, we know that a lead bullet will flatten out a lot on
impact, so there is a surface of contact between the two, and its
160 Chapter 5 Analysis of forces

orientation is vertical. The effect of the force on the bullet is to
stop the horizontal motion of the bullet, and this horizontal ac-
celeration must be produced by a horizontal force. The force is
therefore perpendicular to the surface of contact, and it’s also re-
pulsive (tending to keep the bullet from entering the wall), so it
must be a normal force.
Diagram i is meant to be as simple as possible while including
most of the forces we deal with in everyday life. If you were an
insect, you would be much more interested in the force of surface
tension, which allowed you to walk on water. I have not included
the nuclear forces, which are responsible for holding the nuclei of
atoms, because they are not evident in everyday life.
You should not be afraid to invent your own names for types of
forces that do not fit into the diagram. For instance, the force that
holds a piece of tape to the wall has been left o↵ of the tree, and if
you were analyzing a situation involving scotch tape, you would be
absolutely right to refer to it by some commonsense name such as
“sticky force.”
Ontheotherhand, ifyouarehavingtroubleclassifyingacertain
force, you should also consider whether it is a force at all. For
instance, if someone asks you to classify the force that the earth has
because of its rotation, you would have great di culty creating a
place for it on the diagram. That’s because it’s a type of motion,
not a type of force!
Normal forces
A normal force, F , is a force that keeps one solid object from
N
passing through another. “Normal” is simply a fancy word for “per-
pendicular,” meaning that the force is perpendicular to the surface
of contact. Intuitively, it seems the normal force magically adjusts
itself to provide whatever force is needed to keep the objects from
occupyingthesamespace. Ifyourmusclespressyourhandstogether
gently, there is a gentle normal force. Press harder, and the normal
force gets stronger. How does the normal force know how strong to
be? The answer is that the harder you jam your hands together,
the more compressed your flesh becomes. Your flesh is acting like
a spring: more force is required to compress it more. The same is
true when you push on a wall. The wall flexes imperceptibly in pro-
portion to your force on it. If you exerted enough force, would it be
possible for two objects to pass through each other? No, typically
the result is simply to strain the objects so much that one of them
breaks.
Gravitational forces
Aswe’lldiscussinmoredetaillaterinthecourse, agravitational
forceexistsbetweenanytwothingsthathavemass. Ineverydaylife,
Section 5.2 Classification and behavior of forces 161

the gravitational force between two cars or two people is negligible,
so the only noticeable gravitational forces are the ones between the
earth and various human-scale objects. We refer to these planet-
earth-induced gravitational forces as weight forces, and as we have
already seen, their magnitude is given by F = mg.
W
| |
.Solvedproblem: Weightandmass page184,problem26
Static and kinetic friction
If you have pushed a refrigerator across a kitchen floor, you have
felt a certain series of sensations. At first, you gradually increased
your force on the refrigerator, but it didn’t move. Finally, you sup-
plied enough force to unstick the fridge, and there was a sudden
j/A model that correctly ex-
jerk as the fridge started moving. Once the fridge was unstuck, you
plainsmanypropertiesoffriction.
The microscopic bumps and could reduce your force significantly and still keep it moving.
holes in two surfaces dig into
While you were gradually increasing your force, the floor’s fric-
eachother.
tional force on the fridge increased in response. The two forces on
the fridge canceled, and the fridge didn’t accelerate. How did the
floor know how to respond with just the right amount of force? Fig-
urejshowsonepossiblemodel offrictionthatexplainsthisbehavior.
(A scientific model is a description that we expect to be incomplete,
approximate, or unrealistic in some ways, but that nevertheless suc-
ceeds in explaining a variety of phenomena.) Figure j/1 shows a
microscopic view of the tiny bumps and holes in the surfaces of the
floor and the refrigerator. The weight of the fridge presses the two
surfaces together, and some of the bumps in one surface will settle
as deeply as possible into some of the holes in the other surface. In
j/2, your leftward force on the fridge has caused it to ride up a little
k/Static friction: the tray doesn’t
higher on the bump in the floor labeled with a small arrow. Still
sliponthewaiter’sfingers.
more force is needed to get the fridge over the bump and allow it to
start moving. Of course, this is occurring simultaneously at millions
of places on the two surfaces.
Once you had gotten the fridge moving at constant speed, you
foundthatyouneededtoexertlessforceonit. Sincezerototalforce
is needed to make an object move with constant velocity, the floor’s
rightward frictional force on the fridge has apparently decreased
somewhat, making it easier for you to cancel it out. Our model also
gives a plausible explanation for this fact: as the surfaces slide past
each other, they don’t have time to settle down and mesh with one
another, so there is less friction.
Even though this model is intuitively appealing and fairly suc-
cessful, it should not be taken too seriously, and in some situations
it is misleading. For instance, fancy racing bikes these days are
made with smooth tires that have no tread — contrary to what
l/Kineticfriction: thecarskids.
we’d expect from our model, this does not cause any decrease in
friction. Machinists know that two very smooth and clean metal
162 Chapter 5 Analysis of forces