# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 386-392
############################################################

physical e↵ort to continue rotating, and indeed would be unable to
stop rotating before he hit the water.
These observations have the hallmarks of a conservation law:
A closed system is involved. Nothing is making an e↵ort to
twist the earth, the hydrogen atom, or the high-diver. They are
isolated from rotation-changing influences, i.e., they are closed
systems.
Something remains unchanged. There appears to be a numer-
ical quantity for measuring rotational motion such that the total
amount of that quantity remains constant in a closed system.
Something can be transferred back and forth without
changing the total amount. In figure a, the jumper wants to
get his feet out in front of him so he can keep from doing a “face
plant” when he lands. Bringing his feet forward would involve a
certain quantity of counterclockwise rotation, but he didn’t start
out with any rotation when he left the ground. Suppose we con-
sider counterclockwise as positive and clockwise as negative. The
onlywayhislegscanacquiresomepositiverotationisifsomeother
part of his body picks up an equal amount of negative rotation.
This is why he swings his arms up behind him, clockwise.
Anearlyphotographofanold-fashionedlong-jump.
What numerical measure of rotational motion is conserved? Car en-
ginesandold-fashionedLPrecordshavespeedsofrotationmeasured
in rotations per minute (r.p.m.), but the number of rotations per
minute (or per second) is not a conserved quantity. A twirling fig-
ure skater, for instance, can pull her arms in to increase her r.p.m.’s.
The first section of this chapter deals with the numerical definition
of the quantity of rotation that results in a valid conservation law.
386 Chapter 15 Conservation of angular momentum

15.1 Conservation of angular momentum
When most people think of rotation, they think of a solid object
like a wheel rotating in a circle around a fixed point. Examples of
this type of rotation, called rigid rotation or rigid-body rotation, in-
cludeaspinningtop,aseatedchild’sswingingleg,andahelicopter’s
spinning propeller. Rotation, however, is a much more general phe-
nomenon, and includes noncircular examples such as a comet in
an elliptical orbit around the sun, or a cyclone, in which the core
completes a circle more quickly than the outer parts.
If there is a numerical measure of rotational motion that is a con-
served quantity, then it must include nonrigid cases like these, since
nonrigid rotation can be traded back and forth with rigid rotation.
For instance, there is a trick for finding out if an egg is raw or hard-
boiled. If you spin a hardboiled egg and then stop it briefly with
your finger, it stops dead. But if you do the same with a raw egg, it
springs back into rotation because the soft interior was still swirling
around within the momentarily motionless shell. The pattern of
flow of the liquid part is presumably very complex and nonuniform
An overhead view of a piece
due to the asymmetric shape of the egg and the di↵erent consisten- of putty being thrown at a door.
cies of the yolk and the white, but there is apparently some way to Even though the putty is neither
describe the liquid’s total amount of rotation with a single number, spinning nor traveling along a
ofwhichsomepercentageisgivenbacktotheshellwhenyourelease curve,wemustdefineitashaving
somekindof“rotation”becauseit
it.
isabletomakethedoorrotate.
The best strategy is to devise a way of defining the amount of rota-
tion of a single small part of a system. The amount of rotation of a
system such as a cyclone will then be defined as the total of all the
contributions from its many small parts.
The quest for a conserved quantity of rotation even requires us to
broaden the rotation concept to include cases where the motion
doesn’t repeat or even curve around. If you throw a piece of putty
As seen by someone stand-
at a door, the door will recoil and start rotating. The putty was
ing at the axis, the putty changes
traveling straight, not in a circle, but if there is to be a general
its angular position. We there-
conservation law that can cover this situation, it appears that we fore define it as having angular
must describe the putty as having had some “rotation,” which it momentum.
then gave up to the door. The best way of thinking about it is to
attribute rotation to any moving object or part of an object that
changes its angle in relation to the axis of rotation. In the putty-
and-doorexample,thehingeofthedooristhenaturalpointtothink
of as an axis, and the putty changes its angle as seen by someone
standingatthehinge. Forthisreason,theconservedquantityweare
investigating is called angular momentum. The symbol for angular
momentum can’t be a or m, since those are used for acceleration
and mass, so the symbol L is arbitrarily chosen instead.
Imaginea1-kgblobofputty,thrownatthedoorataspeedof1m/s,
which hits the door at a distance of 1 m from the hinge. We define
this blob to have 1 unit of angular momentum. When it hits the
Conservation of angular momentum 387

door, the door will recoil and start rotating. We can use the speed
at which the door recoils as a measure of the angular momentum
the blob brought in.1
Experiments show, not surprisingly, that a 2-kg blob thrown in the
same way makes the door rotate twice as fast, so the angular mo-
mentum of the putty blob must be proportional to mass,
L m.
/
Similarly, experiments show that doubling the velocity of the blob
will have a doubling e↵ect on the result, so its angular momentum
must be proportional to its velocity as well,
L mv.
/
You have undoubtedly had the experience of approaching a closed
door with one of those bar-shaped handles on it and pushing on
A putty blob thrown directly the wrong side, the side close to the hinges. You feel like an idiot,
at the axis has no angular mo- because you have so little leverage that you can hardly budge the
tion, and therefore no angular
door. The same would be true with the putty blob. Experiments
momentum. It will not cause the
would show that the amount of rotation the blob can give to the
doortorotate.
door is proportional to the distance, r, from the axis of rotation, so
angular momentum must also be proportional to r,
L mvr.
/
We are almost done, but there is one missing ingredient. We know
on grounds of symmetry that a putty ball thrown directly inward
Only the component of the toward the hinge will have no angular momentum to give to the
velocity vector perpendicular door. After all, there would not even be any way to decide whether
to the dashed line should be the ball’s rotation was clockwise or counterclockwise in this situa-
counted into the definition of tion. It is therefore only the component of the blob’s velocity vector
angularmomentum.
perpendicular to the door that should be counted in its angular
momentum,
L = mv r.
?
More generally, v should be thought of as the component of the
?
object’s velocity vector that is perpendicular to the line joining the
object to the axis of rotation.
We find that this equation agrees with the definition of the original
putty blob as having one unit of angular momentum, and we can
now see that the units of angular momentum are (kg m/s) m, i.e.,
· ·
kg m2/s. This gives us a way of calculating the angular momentum
·
of any material object or any system consisting of material objects:
1We assume that the door is much more massive than the blob. Under this
assumption, the speed at which the door recoils is much less than the original
speedoftheblob,sotheblobhaslostessentiallyallitsangularmomentum,and
given it to the door.
388 Chapter 15 Conservation of angular momentum

angular momentum of a material object
The angular momentum of a moving particle is
L = mv r,
?
where m is its mass, v is the component of its velocity vector
?
perpendicular to the line joining it to the axis of rotation, and r is
its distance from the axis. Positive and negative signs are used to
describe opposite directions of rotation.
The angular momentum of a finite-sized object or a system of
many objects is found by dividing it up into many small parts,
applying the equation to each part, and adding to find the total
amount of angular momentum.
Note that r is not necessarily the radius of a circle. (As implied
by the qualifiers, matter isn’t the only thing that can have angular
momentum. Light can also have angular momentum, and the above
equation would not apply to light.)
Conservation of angular momentum has been verified over and over
again by experiment, and is now believed to be one of the three
most fundamental principles of physics, along with conservation of
energy and momentum.
A figure skater pulls her arms in example 1
Whenafigureskateristwirling,thereisverylittlefrictionbetween
her and the ice, so she is essentially a closed system, and her
angular momentum is conserved. If she pulls her arms in, she is
decreasing r for all the atoms in her arms. It would violate con-
servation of angular momentum if she then continued rotating at
the same speed, i.e., taking the same amount of time for each
revolution, because her arms’ contributions to her angular mo-
mentum would have decreased, and no other part of her would
have increased its angular momentum. This is impossible be-
cause it would violate conservation of angular momentum. If her
total angular momentum is to remain constant, the decrease in r
for her arms must be compensated for by an overall increase in
her rate of rotation. That is, by pulling her arms in, she substan- A figure skater pulls in her
tially reduces the time for each rotation. arms so that she can execute a
spinmorerapidly.
Conservation of angular momentum 389

Example2.
Changing the axis example 2
Anobject’sangularmomentumcanbedifferentdependingonthe
axis about which it rotates. Figure g shows two double-exposure
Example 3. A view of the photographs a viola player tipping the bow in order to cross from
earth-moon system from above one string to another. Much more angular momentum is required
the north pole. All distances when playing near the bow’s handle, called the frog, as in the
have been highly distorted for
panel on the right; not only are most of the atoms in the bow
legibility. The earth’s rotation is
at greater distances, r, from the axis of rotation, but the ones in
counterclockwise from this point
the tip also have more momentum, p. It is difficult for the player
ofview(arrow). Themoon’sgrav-
to quickly transfer a large angular momentum into the bow, and
ity creates a bulge on the side
near it, because its gravitational thentransferitbackoutjustasquickly. (Inthelanguageofsection
pull is stronger there, and an 15.4, large torques are required.) This is one of the reasons that
“anti-bulge” on the far side, since stringplayerstendtostaynearthemiddleofthebowasmuchas
its gravity there is weaker. For
possible.
simplicity, let’s focus on the tidal
bulge closer to the moon. Its Earth’s slowing rotation and the receding moon example 3
frictional force is trying to slow
Asnotedinchapter1,theearth’srotationisactuallyslowingdown
down the earth’s rotation, so its
verygradually,withthekineticenergybeingdissipatedasheatby
force on the earth’s solid crust is
friction between the land and the tidal bulges raised in the seas
toward the bottom of the figure.
by the earth’s gravity. Does this mean that angular momentum is
By Newton’s third law, the crust
must thus make a force on the not really perfectly conserved? No, it just means that the earth
bulge which is toward the top of is not quite a closed system by itself. If we consider the earth
the figure. This causes the bulge and moon as a system, then the angular momentum lost by the
to be pulled forward at a slight earthmustbegainedbythemoonsomehow. Infactveryprecise
angle, and the bulge’s gravity
measurements of the distance between the earth and the moon
therefore pulls the moon forward,
have been carried out by bouncing laser beams off of a mirror
accelerating its orbital motion
left there by astronauts, and these measurements show that the
about the earth and flinging it
outward. moon is receding from the earth at a rate of 4 centimeters per
year! The moon’s greater value of r means that it has a greater
390 Chapter 15 Conservation of angular momentum

angular momentum, and the increase turns out to be exactly the
amount lost by the earth. In the days of the dinosaurs, the days
weresignificantlyshorter,andthemoonwascloserandappeared
bigger in the sky.
But what force is causing the moon to speed up, drawing it out
into a larger orbit? It is the gravitational forces of the earth’s tidal
bulges. The effect is described qualitatively in the caption of the
figure. The result would obviously be extremely difficult to calcu-
latedirectly,andthisisoneofthosesituationswhereaconserva-
tion law allows us to make precise quantitative statements about
the outcome of a process when the calculation of the process
itself would be prohibitively complex.
Restriction to rotation in a plane
Is angular momentum a vector, or a scalar? It does have a direction
in space, but it’s a direction of rotation, not a straight-line direction
like the directions of vectors such as velocity or force. It turns out
(see problem 29) that there is a way of defining angular momentum
asavector,butinthisbooktheexampleswillbeconfinedtoasingle
plane of rotation, i.e., e↵ectively two-dimensional situations. In this
special case, we can choose to visualize the plane of rotation from
one side or the other, and to define clockwise and counterclockwise
rotation as having opposite signs of angular momentum.
Discussion question
A Conservation of plain old momentum, p, can be thought of as the
greatly expanded and modified descendant of Galileo’s original principle
ofinertia,thatnoforceisrequiredtokeepanobjectinmotion. Theprinci-
ple of inertia is counterintuitive, and there are many situations in which it
appears superficially that a force is needed to maintain motion, as main-
tained by Aristotle. Think of a situation in which conservation of angular
momentum,L,alsoseemstobeviolated,makingitseemincorrectlythat
something external must act on a closed system to keep its angular mo-
mentumfrom“runningdown.”
15.2 Angular momentum in planetary motion
We now discuss the application of conservation of angular momen-
tum to planetary motion, both because of its intrinsic importance
andbecauseitisagoodwaytodevelopavisualintuitionforangular
momentum.
Kepler’s law of equal areas states that the area swept out by a
planet in a certain length of time is always the same. Angular
momentum had not been invented in Kepler’s time, and he did not
evenknowthemostbasicphysicalfactsabouttheforcesatwork. He
thoughtofthislawasanentirelyempiricalandunexpectedlysimple
way of summarizing his data, a rule that succeeded in describing
and predicting how the planets sped up and slowed down in their
Angular momentum in planetary motion 391