# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 131-137
############################################################

Weight
In physics, an object’s weight, F , is defined as the earth’s
W
gravitational force on it. The SI unit of weight is therefore the
Newton. People commonly refer to the kilogram as a unit of weight,
butthekilogramisaunitofmass, notweight. Notethatanobject’s
weight is not a fixed property of that object. Objects weigh more
in some places than in others, depending on the local strength of
gravity. It is their mass that always stays the same. A baseball
pitcher who can throw a 90-mile-per-hour fastball on earth would
not be able to throw any faster on the moon, because the ball’s
inertia would still be the same.
Positive and negative signs of force
We’ll start by considering only cases of one-dimensional center-
of-massmotioninwhichalltheforcesareparalleltothedirectionof
motion, i.e., either directly forward or backward. In one dimension,
plus and minus signs can be used to indicate directions of forces, as
showninfigurec. Wecanthenrefergenericallytoadditionofforces,
c/Forces are applied to a
ratherthanhavingtospeaksometimesofadditionandsometimesof
saxophone. In this example,
subtraction. We add the forces shown in the figure and get 11 N. In
positive signs have been used
general, weshouldchooseaone-dimensionalcoordinatesystemwith consistently for forces to the
its x axis parallel the direction of motion. Forces that point along right, and negative signs for
the positive x axis are positive, and forces in the opposite direction forces to the left. (The forces
are negative. Forces that are not directly along the x axis cannot be are being applied to different
placesonthesaxophone, butthe
immediately incorporated into this scheme, but that’s OK, because
numericalvalueofaforcecarries
we’re avoiding those cases for now.
noinformationaboutthat.)
Discussion questions
A In chapter 0, I defined 1 N as the force that would accelerate a
1-kgmassfromrestto1m/sin1s. Anticipatingthefollowingsection,you
mightguessthat2Ncouldbedefinedastheforcethatwouldaccelerate
thesamemasstotwicethespeed,ortwicethemasstothesamespeed.
Isthereaneasierwaytodefine2Nbasedonthedefinitionof1N?
4.2 Newton’s first law
We are now prepared to make a more powerful restatement of the
principle of inertia.1
Newton’s first law
If the total force acting on an object is zero, its center of mass
continues in the same state of motion.
In other words, an object initially at rest is predicted to remain
at rest if the total force acting on it is zero, and an object in motion
1Page81listsplacesinthisbookwherewedescribeexperimentaltestsofthe
principle of inertia and Newton’s first law.
Section 4.2 Newton’s first law 131

remainsinmotionwiththesamevelocityinthesamedirection. The
converse of Newton’s first law is also true: if we observe an object
moving with constant velocity along a straight line, then the total
force on it must be zero.
In a future physics course or in another textbook, you may en-
counter the term “net force,” which is simply a synonym for total
force.
What happens if the total force on an object is not zero? It
accelerates. Numericalpredictionoftheresultingaccelerationisthe
topic of Newton’s second law, which we’ll discuss in the following
section.
This is the first of Newton’s three laws of motion. It is not
important to memorize which of Newton’s three laws are numbers
one, two, and three. If a future physics teacher asks you something
like, “Which of Newton’s laws are you thinking of?,” a perfectly
acceptable answer is “The one about constant velocity when there’s
zero total force.” The concepts are more important than any spe-
cific formulation of them. Newton wrote in Latin, and I am not
aware of any modern textbook that uses a verbatim translation of
his statement of the laws of motion. Clear writing was not in vogue
in Newton’s day, and he formulated his three laws in terms of a con-
cept now called momentum, only later relating it to the concept of
force. Nearly all modern texts, including this one, start with force
and do momentum later.
An elevator example 1
.Anelevatorhasaweightof5000N.Comparetheforcesthatthe
cablemustexerttoraiseitatconstantvelocity,loweritatconstant
velocity, and just keep it hanging.
. In all three cases the cable must pull up with a force of exactly
5000 N. Most people think you’d need at least a little more than
5000Ntomakeitgoup,andalittlelessthan5000Ntoletitdown,
but that’s incorrect. Extra force from the cable is only necessary
forspeedingthecarupwhenitstartsgoinguporslowingitdown
whenitfinishesgoingdown. Decreasedforceisneededtospeed
the car up when it gets going down and to slow it down when it
finishes going up. But when the elevator is cruising at constant
velocity, Newton’s first law says that you just need to cancel the
force of the earth’s gravity.
Tomanystudents, thestatementintheexamplethatthecable’s
upward force “cancels” the earth’s downward gravitational force im-
plies that there has been a contest, and the cable’s force has won,
vanquishing the earth’s gravitational force and making it disappear.
That is incorrect. Both forces continue to exist, but because they
add up numerically to zero, the elevator has no center-of-mass ac-
celeration. We know that both forces continue to exist because they
both have side-e↵ects other than their e↵ects on the car’s center-of-
132 Chapter 4 Force and motion

mass motion. The force acting between the cable and the car con-
tinues to produce tension in the cable and keep the cable taut. The
earth’s gravitational force continues to keep the passengers (whom
we are considering as part of the elevator-object) stuck to the floor
and to produce internal stresses in the walls of the car, which must
hold up the floor.
Terminal velocity for falling objects example 2
.Anobjectlikeafeatherthatisnotdenseorstreamlineddoesnot
fall with constant acceleration, because air resistance is nonneg-
ligible. In fact, its acceleration tapers off to nearly zero within a
fractionofasecond,andthefeatherfinishesdroppingatconstant
speed (known as its terminal velocity). Why does this happen?
.Newton’sfirstlawtellsusthatthetotalforceonthefeathermust
have been reduced to nearly zero after a short time. There are
two forces acting on the feather: a downward gravitational force
from the planet earth, and an upward frictional force from the air.
As the feather speeds up, the air friction becomes stronger and
stronger, and eventually it cancels out the earth’s gravitational
force, so the feather just continues with constant velocity without
speeding up any more.
The situation for a skydiver is exactly analogous. It’s just that the
skydiver experiences perhaps a million times more gravitational
force than the feather, and it is not until she is falling very fast
that the force of air friction becomes as strong as the gravita-
tional force. It takes her several seconds to reach terminal veloc-
ity, which is on the order of a hundred miles per hour.
More general combinations of forces
It is too constraining to restrict our attention to cases where
all the forces lie along the line of the center of mass’s motion. For
one thing, we can’t analyze any case of horizontal motion, since
any object on earth will be subject to a vertical gravitational force!
For instance, when you are driving your car down a straight road,
there are both horizontal forces and vertical forces. However, the
vertical forces have no e↵ect on the center of mass motion, because
the road’s upward force simply counteracts the earth’s downward
gravitational force and keeps the car from sinking into the ground.
Later in the book we’ll deal with the most general case of many
forces acting on an object at any angles, using the mathematical
technique of vector addition, but the following slight generalization
of Newton’s first law allows us to analyze a great many cases of
interest:
Suppose that an object has two sets of forces acting on it, one
set along the line of the object’s initial motion and another set per-
pendicular to the first set. If both sets of forces cancel, then the
object’s center of mass continues in the same state of motion.
Section 4.2 Newton’s first law 133

A passenger riding the subway example 3
. Describe the forces acting on a person standing in a subway
train that is cruising at constant velocity.
. No force is necessary to keep the person moving relative to
the ground. He will not be swept to the back of the train if the
floor is slippery. There are two vertical forces on him, the earth’s
downward gravitational force and the floor’s upward force, which
cancel. There are no horizontal forces on him at all, so of course
the total horizontal force is zero.
Forces on a sailboat example 4
.Ifasailboatiscruisingatconstantvelocitywiththewindcoming
from directly behind it, what must be true about the forces acting
on it?
. The forces acting on the boat must be canceling each other
out. The boat is not sinking or leaping into the air, so evidently
the vertical forces are canceling out. The vertical forces are the
downward gravitational force exerted by the planet earth and an
upward force from the water.
The air is making a forward force on the sail, and if the boat is
not accelerating horizontally then the water’s backward frictional
d/Example4.
force must be canceling it out.
ContrarytoAristotle,moreforceisnotneededinordertomaintain
a higher speed. Zero total force is always needed to maintain
constant velocity. Consider the following made-up numbers:
boat moving at boat moving at
a low, constant ahigh,constant
velocity velocity
forward force of 10,000 N 20,000 N
the wind on the
sail ...
backwardforceof 10,000 N 20,000 N
   
the water on the
hull ...
total force on the 0 N 0 N
boat ...
The faster boat still has zero total force on it. The forward force
on it is greater, and the backward force smaller (more negative),
but that’s irrelevant because Newton’s first law has to do with the
total force, not the individual forces.
Thisexampleisquiteanalogoustotheoneaboutterminalvelocity
of falling objects, since there is a frictional force that increases
with speed. After casting off from the dock and raising the sail,
theboatwillacceleratebriefly,andthenreachitsterminalvelocity,
at which the water’s frictional force has become as great as the
wind’s force on the sail.
134 Chapter 4 Force and motion

A car crash example 5
. If you drive your car into a brick wall, what is the mysterious
force that slams your face into the steering wheel?
. Your surgeon has taken physics, so she is not going to believe
your claim that a mysterious force is to blame. She knows that
your face was just following Newton’s first law. Immediately after
your car hit the wall, the only forces acting on your head were
the same canceling-out forces that had existed previously: the
earth’s downward gravitational force and the upward force from
your neck. There were no forward or backward forces on your
head, but the car did experience a backward force from the wall,
so the car slowed down and your face caught up.
Discussion questions
A Newton said that objects continue moving if no forces are acting
onthem,buthispredecessorAristotlesaidthataforcewasnecessaryto
keepanobjectmoving. WhydoesAristotle’stheoryseemmoreplausible,
even though we now believe it to be wrong? What insight was Aristotle
missingaboutthereasonwhythingsseemtoslowdownnaturally? Give
anexample.
B Inthefigurewhatwouldhavetobetrueaboutthesaxophone’sinitial
motion if the forces shown were to result in continued one-dimensional
motionofitscenterofmass?
C This figure requires an ever further generalization of the preceding
discussion. Afterstudyingtheforces,whatdoesyourphysicalintuitiontell DiscussionquestionB.
youwillhappen? Canyoustateinwordshowtogeneralizetheconditions
forone-dimensionalmotiontoincludesituationslikethisone?
4.3 Newton’s second law
What about cases where the total force on an object is not zero,
so that Newton’s first law doesn’t apply? The object will have an
acceleration. The way we’ve defined positive and negative signs
of force and acceleration guarantees that positive forces produce
positive accelerations, and likewise for negative values. How much
acceleration will it have? It will clearly depend on both the object’s DiscussionquestionC.
mass and on the amount of force.
Experiments with any particular object show that its acceler-
ation is directly proportional to the total force applied to it. This
mayseemwrong, sinceweknowofmanycaseswheresmallamounts
of force fail to move an object at all, and larger forces get it going.
This apparent failure of proportionality actually results from for-
getting that there is a frictional force in addition to the force we
apply to move the object. The object’s acceleration is exactly pro-
portional to the total force on it, not to any individual force on it.
In the absence of friction, even a very tiny force can slowly change
the velocity of a very massive object.
Section 4.3 Newton’s second law 135

Experiments (e.g., the one described in example 11 on p. 140)
also show that the acceleration is inversely proportional to the ob-
ject’s mass, and combining these two proportionalities gives the fol-
lowing way of predicting the acceleration of any object:
Newton’s second law
a = F /m,
total
where
m is an object’s mass, a measure of its resistance
to changes in its motion
F is the sum of the forces acting on it, and
total
a is the acceleration of the object’s center of mass.
Wearepresentlyrestrictedtothecasewheretheforcesofinterest
are parallel to the direction of motion.
We have already encountered the SI unit of force, which is the
newton (N). It is designed so that the units in Newton’s second law
all work out if we use SI units: m/s2 for acceleration and kg (not
grams!) for mass.
Rocket science example 6
. The Falcon 9 launch vehicle, built and operated by the private
company SpaceX, has mass m = 5.1 105 kg. At launch, it
⇥
has two forces acting on it: an upward thrust F = 5.9 106 N
t
⇥
and a downward gravitational force of F = 5.0 106 N. Find its
g
⇥
acceleration.
. Let’s choose our coordinate system such that positive is up.
Thenthedownwardforceofgravityisconsiderednegative. Using
Newton’s second law,
F
total
a =
m
F F
t g
=  
m
(5.9 106 N) (5.0 106 N)
e/Example6 = ⇥
5.1
 
105 kg
⇥
⇥
= 1.6 m/s2,
where as noted above, units of N/kg (newtons per kilogram) are
the same as m/s2.
136 Chapter 4 Force and motion