# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 39-46
############################################################

Exercise 0: Models and idealization
Equipment:
co↵ee filters
ramps (one per group)
balls of various sizes
sticky tape
vacuum pump and “guinea and feather” apparatus (one)
The motion of falling objects has been recognized since ancient times as an important piece of
physics, but the motion is inconveniently fast, so in our everyday experience it can be hard to
tellexactlywhatobjectsaredoingwhentheyfall. Inthisexerciseyouwilluseseveraltechniques
to get around this problem and study the motion. Your goal is to construct a scientific model of
falling. A model means an explanation that makes testable predictions. Often models contain
simplifications or idealizations that make them easier to work with, even though they are not
strictly realistic.
1. One method of making falling easier to observe is to use objects like feathers that we know
from everyday experience will not fall as fast. You will use co↵ee filters, in stacks of various
sizes, to test the following two hypotheses and see which one is true, or whether neither is true:
Hypothesis 1A: When an object is dropped, it rapidly speeds up to a certain natural falling
speed, and then continues to fall at that speed. The falling speed is proportional to the object’s
weight. (A proportionality is not just a statement that if one thing gets bigger, the other does
too. It says that if one becomes three times bigger, the other also gets three times bigger, etc.)
Hypothesis 1B: Di↵erent objects fall the same way, regardless of weight.
Test these hypotheses and discuss your results with your instructor.
2. A second way to slow down the action is to let a ball roll down a ramp. The steeper the
ramp, the closer to free fall. Based on your experience in part 1, write a hypothesis about what
will happen when you race a heavier ball against a lighter ball down the same ramp, starting
them both from rest.
Hypothesis:
Show your hypothesis to your instructor, and then test it.
You have probably found that falling was more complicated than you thought! Is there more
than one factor that a↵ects the motion of a falling object? Can you imagine certain idealized
situations that are simpler? Try to agree verbally with your group on an informal model of
falling that can make predictions about the experiments described in parts 3 and 4.
3. You have three balls: a standard “comparison ball” of medium weight, a light ball, and a
heavy ball. Suppose you stand on a chair and (a) drop the light ball side by side with the
comparison ball, then (b) drop the heavy ball side by side with the comparison ball, then (c)
join the light and heavy balls together with sticky tape and drop them side by side with the
comparison ball.
Use your model to make a prediction:
Test your prediction.
Exercise 0: Models and idealization 39

4. Your instructor will pump nearly all the air out of a chamber containing a feather and a
heavier object, then let them fall side by side in the chamber.
Use your model to make a prediction:
40 Chapter 0 Introduction and review

Life would be very different if you
werethesizeofaninsect.
Chapter 1
Scaling and estimation
1.1 Introduction
Whycan’taninsectbethesizeofadog? Someskinnystretched-
out cells in your spinal cord are a meter tall — why does nature
display no single cells that are not just a meter tall, but a meter
wide,andameterthickaswell? Believeitornot,thesearequestions
thatcanbeansweredfairlyeasilywithoutknowingmuchmoreabout
physics than you already do. The only mathematical technique you
really need is the humble conversion, applied to area and volume.
a/Amoebas this size are
Area and volume seldomencountered.
Area can be defined by saying that we can copy the shape of
interest onto graph paper with 1 cm 1 cm squares and count the
⇥
number of squares inside. Fractions of squares can be estimated by
eye. We then say the area equals the number of squares, in units of
square cm. Although this might seem less “pure” than computing
areas using formulae like A = ⇡r2 for a circle or A = wh/2 for a
triangle, those formulae are not useful as definitions of area because
they cannot be applied to irregularly shaped areas.
Unitsofsquarecmaremorecommonlywrittenascm2 inscience.
Of course, the unit of measurement symbolized by “cm” is not an
41

algebrasymbolstandingforanumberthatcanbeliterallymultiplied
by itself. But it is advantageous to write the units of area that way
and treat the units as if they were algebra symbols. For instance,
if you have a rectangle with an area of 6m2 and a width of 2 m,
then calculating its length as (6 m2)/(2 m) = 3 m gives a result
that makes sense both numerically and in terms of units. This
algebra-style treatment of the units also ensures that our methods
of converting units work out correctly. For instance, if we accept
the fraction
100 cm
1 m
as a valid way of writing the number one, then one times one equals
one, so we should also say that one can be represented by
100 cm 100 cm
,
1 m ⇥ 1 m
which is the same as
10000 cm2
.
1 m2
That means the conversion factor from square meters to square cen-
timeters is a factor of 104, i.e., a square meter has 104 square cen-
timeters in it.
All of the above can be easily applied to volume as well, using
one-cubic-centimeter blocks instead of squares on graph paper.
To many people, it seems hard to believe that a square meter
equals 10000 square centimeters, or that a cubic meter equals a
million cubic centimeters — they think it would make more sense if
there were 100 cm2 in 1m2, and 100 cm3 in 1m3, but that would be
incorrect. The examples shown in figure b aim to make the correct
answer more believable, using the traditional U.S. units of feet and
yards. (One foot is 12 inches, and one yard is three feet.)
b/Visualizing conversions of
area and volume using traditional
U.S.units.
self-checkA
Basedonfigureb,convinceyourselfthatthereare9ft2inasquareyard,
and27ft3inacubicyard,thendemonstratethesamethingsymbolically
(i.e.,withthemethodusingfractionsthatequalone). .Answer,p.
550
42 Chapter 1 Scaling and estimation

.Solvedproblem: convertingmm2 tocm2 page59,problem10
.Solvedproblem: scalingaliter page60,problem19
Discussion question
A Howmanysquarecentimetersarethereinasquareinch? (1inch=
2.54cm)Firstfindanapproximateanswerbymakingadrawing,thende-
rivetheconversionfactormoreaccuratelyusingthesymbolicmethod.
c/GalileoGalilei(1564-1642)wasaRenaissanceItalianwhobroughtthe
scientific method to bear on physics, creating the modern version of the
science. Coming from a noble but very poor family, Galileo had to drop
outofmedicalschoolattheUniversityofPisawhenheranoutofmoney.
Eventually becoming a lecturer in mathematics at the same school, he
began a career as a notorious troublemaker by writing a burlesque ridi-
culingtheuniversity’sregulations—hewasforcedtoresign,butfounda
new teaching position at Padua. He invented the pendulum clock, inves-
tigatedthemotionoffallingbodies,anddiscoveredthemoonsofJupiter.
The thrust of his life’s work was to discredit Aristotle’s physics by con-
fronting it with contradictory experiments, a program that paved the way
for Newton’s discovery of the relationship between force and motion. In
chapter3we’llcometothestoryofGalileo’sultimatefateatthehandsof
theChurch.
1.2 Scaling of area and volume
Great fleas have lesser fleas
Upon their backs to bite ’em.
And lesser fleas have lesser still,
And so ad infinitum.
Jonathan Swift
Now how do these conversions of area and volume relate to the
questions I posed about sizes of living things? Well, imagine that
you are shrunk like Alice in Wonderland to the size of an insect.
One way of thinking about the change of scale is that what used
to look like a centimeter now looks like perhaps a meter to you,
becauseyou’resomuchsmaller. Ifareaandvolumescaledaccording
to most people’s intuitive, incorrect expectations, with 1 m2 being
the same as 100 cm2, then there would be no particular reason
why nature should behave any di↵erently on your new, reduced
scale. But nature does behave di↵erently now that you’re small.
For instance, you will find that you can walk on water, and jump
to many times your own height. The physicist Galileo Galilei had
the basic insight that the scaling of area and volume determines
how natural phenomena behave di↵erently on di↵erent scales. He
first reasoned about mechanical structures, but later extended his
insightstolivingthings,takingthethen-radicalpointofviewthatat
thefundamentallevel, alivingorganismshouldfollowthesamelaws
Section 1.2 Scaling of area and volume 43

of nature as a machine. We will follow his lead by first discussing
machines and then living things.
Galileo on the behavior of nature on large and small scales
One of the world’s most famous pieces of scientific writing is
Galileo’s Dialogues Concerning the Two New Sciences. Galileo was
anentertainingwriterwhowantedtoexplainthingsclearlytolaypeo-
ple,andheliveneduphisworkbycastingitintheformofadialogue
among three people. Salviati is really Galileo’s alter ego. Simplicio
is the stupid character, and one of the reasons Galileo got in trouble
with the Church was that there were rumors that Simplicio repre-
sentedthePope. Sagredoistheearnestandintelligentstudent,with
whom the reader is supposed to identify. (The following excerpts
are from the 1914 translation by Crew and de Salvio.)
SAGREDO: Yes,thatiswhatImean;andIreferespeciallyto
his last assertion which I have always regarded as false...;
namely, that in speaking of these and other similar machines
one cannot argue from the small to the large, because many
devices which succeed on a small scale do not work on a
d/The small boat holds up large scale. Now, since mechanics has its foundations in ge-
justfine. ometry, where mere size [ is unimportant], I do not see that
thepropertiesofcircles,triangles,cylinders,conesandother
solid figures will change with their size. If, therefore, a large
machine be constructed in such a way that its parts bear to
one another the same ratio as in a smaller one, and if the
smaller is sufficiently strong for the purpose for which it is
designed, I do not see why the larger should not be able to
withstandanysevereanddestructiveteststowhichitmaybe
e/A larger boat built with
subjected.
the same proportions as the
small one will collapse under its Salviati contradicts Sagredo:
ownweight.
SALVIATI: ...Please observe, gentlemen, how facts which
atfirstseemimprobablewill,evenonscantexplanation,drop
thecloakwhichhashiddenthemandstandforthinnakedand
simplebeauty. Whodoesnotknowthatahorsefallingfroma
heightofthreeorfourcubitswillbreakhisbones,whileadog
falling from the same height or a cat from a height of eight
or ten cubits will suffer no injury? Equally harmless would be
f/A boat this large needs to
thefallofagrasshopperfromatowerorthefallofanantfrom
have timbers that are thicker
the distance of the moon.
comparedtoitssize.
ThepointGalileoismakinghereisthatsmallthingsaresturdier
inproportiontotheirsize. Therearealotofobjectionsthatcouldbe
raised, however. Afterall, whatdoesitreallymeanforsomethingto
be “strong”, to be “strong in proportion to its size,” or to be strong
“out of proportion to its size?” Galileo hasn’t given operational
definitions of things like “strength,” i.e., definitions that spell out
how to measure them numerically.
44 Chapter 1 Scaling and estimation

Also, a cat is shaped di↵erently from a horse — an enlarged
photograph of a cat would not be mistaken for a horse, even if the
photo-doctoring experts at the National Inquirer made it look like a
person was riding on its back. A grasshopper is not even a mammal,
and it has an exoskeleton instead of an internal skeleton. The whole
argument would be a lot more convincing if we could do some iso-
lation of variables, a scientific term that means to change only one
thingatatime, isolatingitfromtheothervariablesthatmighthave
an e↵ect. If size is the variable whose e↵ect we’re interested in see-
ing, then we don’t really want to compare things that are di↵erent
in size but also di↵erent in other ways.
SALVIATI: ...we asked the reason why [shipbuilders] em-
ployed stocks, scaffolding, and bracing of larger dimensions
for launching a big vessel than they do for a small one; and
[an old man] answered that they did this in order to avoid the
dangeroftheshippartingunderitsownheavyweight,adan-
ger to which small boats are not subject?
After this entertaining but not scientifically rigorous beginning,
Galileo starts to do something worthwhile by modern standards.
He simplifies everything by considering the strength of a wooden
g/Galileo discusses planks
plank. The variables involved can then be narrowed down to the
made of wood, but the concept
type of wood, the width, the thickness, and the length. He also
may be easier to imagine with
gives an operational definition of what it means for the plank to clay. All three clay rods in the
have a certain strength “in proportion to its size,” by introducing figure were originally the same
the concept of a plank that is the longest one that would not snap shape. The medium-sized one
under its own weight if supported at one end. If you increased was twice the height, twice the
length, and twice the width of
its length by the slightest amount, without increasing its width or
the small one, and similarly the
thickness, it would break. He says that if one plank is the same
large one was twice as big as
shape as another but a di↵erent size, appearing like a reduced or
the medium one in all its linear
enlarged photograph of the other, then the planks would be strong
dimensions. The big one has
“inproportiontotheirsizes”ifbothwerejustbarelyabletosupport four times the linear dimensions
their own weight. of the small one, 16 times the
cross-sectional area when cut
perpendicular to the page, and
64timesthevolume. Thatmeans
that the big one has 64 times the
weight to support, but only 16
times the strength compared to
thesmallestone.
h/1. This plank is as long as it
can be without collapsing under
its own weight. If it was a hun-
dredth of an inch longer, it would
collapse. 2. This plank is made
outofthesamekindofwood. Itis
twice as thick, twice as long, and
twice as wide. It will collapse un-
deritsownweight.
Section 1.2 Scaling of area and volume 45