# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 525-532
############################################################

as to perceive them as a single, fused sensation of tone.
Musical applications
Many musicians claim to be able to pick out by ear several of the
frequencies 2f , 3f , ..., called overtones or harmonics of the funda-
o o
mental f , but they are kidding themselves. In reality, the overtone
o
series has two important roles in music, neither of which depends
on this fictitious ability to “hear out” the individual overtones.
First, the relative strengths of the overtones is an important part of
the personality of a sound, called its timbre (rhymes with “amber”).
The characteristic tone of the brass instruments, for example, is a
sound that starts out with a very strong harmonic series extending
up to very high frequencies, but whose higher harmonics die down
drastically as the attack changes to the sustained portion of the
note.
Second, although the ear cannot separate the individual harmonics
of a single musical tone, it is very sensitive to clashes between the
overtones of notes played simultaneously, i.e., in harmony. We tend Graphs of loudness versus
to perceive a combination of notes as being dissonant if they have frequency for the vowel “ah,”
overtonesthatareclosebutnotthesame. Roughlyspeaking, strong sung as three different musical
notes. G is consonant with D,
overtones whose frequencies di↵er by more than 1% and less than
since every overtone of G that is
10% cause the notes to sound dissonant. It is important to realize
close to an overtone of D (*) is at
thattheterm“dissonance”isnotanegativeoneinmusic. Nomatter
exactly the same frequency. G
how long you search the radio dial, you will never hear more than
and C# are dissonant together,
three seconds of music without at least one dissonant combination sincesomeoftheovertonesofG
of notes. Dissonance is a necessary ingredient in the creation of a (x) are close to, but not right on
musicalcycleoftensionandrelease. Musicallyknowledgeablepeople topof,thoseofC#.
don’t use the word “dissonant” as a criticism of music, although
dissonance can be used in a clumsy way, or without providing any
contrast between dissonance and consonance.
Standing waves
Figure w shows sinusoidal wave patterns made by shaking a rope. I
used to enjoy doing this at the bank with the pens on chains, back
inthedayswhenpeopleactuallywenttothebank. Youmightthink
that I and the person in the photos had to practice for a long time
in order to get such nice sine waves. In fact, a sine wave is the only
shape that can create this kind of wave pattern, called a standing
wave, which simply vibrates back and forth in one place without
moving. The sine wave just creates itself automatically when you
find the right frequency, because no other shape is possible.
Ifyouthinkaboutit, it’snotevenobviousthatsinewavesshouldbe
able to do this trick. After all, waves are supposed to travel at a set Sine waves add to make sine
waves. Other functions don’t
speed, aren’t they? The speed isn’t supposed to be zero! Well, we
havethisproperty.
canactuallythinkofastandingwaveasasuperpositionofamoving
Waves bounded on both sides 525

Standingwavesonaspring.
sine wave with its own reflection, which is moving the opposite way.
Sine waves have the unique mathematical property, v, that the sum
of sine waves of equal wavelength is simply a new sine wave with
the same wavelength. As the two sine waves go back and forth, they
always cancel perfectly at the ends, and their sum appears to stand
still.
Standing wave patterns are rather important, since atoms are really
A salamander crawls across standing-wave patterns of electron waves. You are a standing wave!
a person’s palm. Its spine
Harmonics on string instruments example 8
oscillatesasastandingwave.
Figure y shows a violist playing what string players refer to as a
natural harmonic. The term “harmonic” is used here in a some-
what different sense than in physics. The musician’s pinkie is
pressing very lightly against the string — not hard enough to
makeittouchthefingerboard—atapointpreciselyatthecenter
of the string’s length. As shown in the diagram, this allows the
string to vibrate at frequencies 2f ,4f ,6f ,..., which have sta-
o o o
tionary points at the center of the string, but not at the odd mul-
tiples f ,3f ,.... Since all the overtones are multiples of 2f , the
o o o
ear perceives 2f as the basic frequency of the note. In musical
o
terms,doublingthefrequencycorrespondstoraisingthepitchby
an octave. The technique can be used in order to make it easier
toplayhighnotesinrapidpassages,orforitsownsake,because
Example8.
of the change in timbre.
526 Chapter 20 Bounded waves

Standing-wave patterns of air columns
The air column inside a wind instrument behaves very much like
the wave-on-a-string example we’ve been concentrating on so far,
the main di↵erence being that we may have either inverting or non-
inverting reflections at the ends.
Some organ pipes are closed at both ends. The speed of sound
is di↵erent in metal than in air, so there is a strong reflection at
the closed ends, and we can have standing waves. These reflections
are both density-noninverting, so we get symmetric standing-wave
patterns, such as the one shown in figure aa/1.
Surprisingly, sound waves
Figure z shows the sound waves in and around a bamboo Japanese
undergo partial reflection at the
flute called a shakuhachi, which is open at both ends of the air
open ends of tubes as well as
column. We can only have a standing wave pattern if there are
closedones.
reflections at the ends, but that is very counterintuitive — why is
there any reflection at all, if the sound wave is free to emerge into
open space, and there is no change in medium? Recall the reason
why we got reflections at a change in medium: because the wave-
length changes, so the wave has to readjust itself from one pattern
to another, and the only way it can do that without developing a
kink is if there is a reflection. Something similar is happening here.
The only di↵erence is that the wave is adjusting from being a plane
wave to being a spherical wave. The reflections at the open ends
are density-inverting, aa/2, so the wave pattern is pinched o↵ at the
ends. Comparing panels 1 and 2 of the figure, we see that although
the wave pattens are di↵erent, in both cases the wavelength is the
same: in the lowest-frequency standing wave, half a wavelength fits
inside the tube. Thus, it isn’t necessary to memorize which type of
reflection is inverting and which is inverting. It’s only necessary to
know that the tubes are symmetric.
Graphs of excess density versus
Finally,wecanhaveanasymmetrictube: closedatoneendandopen
position for the lowest-frequency
at the other. A common example is the pan pipes, ab, which are standing waves of three types of
closed at the bottom and open at the top. The standing wave with air columns. Points on the axis
the lowest frequency is therefore one in which 1/4 of a wavelength havenormalairdensity.
fits along the length of the tube, as shown in figure aa/3.
Sometimes an instrument’s physical appearance can be misleading.
Aconcertflute,ac,isclosedatthemouthendandopenattheother,
so we would expect it to behave like an asymmetric air column; in
reality, it behaves like a symmetric air column open at both ends,
because the embouchure hole (the hole the player blows over) acts
like an open end. The clarinet and the saxophone look similar, hav-
ing a mouthpiece and reed at one end and an open end at the other,
but they act di↵erent. In fact the clarinet’s air column has patterns
of vibration that are asymmetric, the saxophone symmetric. The
discrepancy comes from the di↵erence between the conical tube of
the sax and the cylindrical tube of the clarinet. The adjustment
of the wave pattern from a plane wave to a spherical wave is more
Waves bounded on both sides 527

gradual at the flaring bell of the saxophone.
self-checkF
Draw a graph of density versus position for the first overtone of the air
column in a tube open at one end and closed at the other. This will be
the next-to-longest possible wavelength that allows for a point of maxi-
mumvibrationatoneendandapointofnovibrationattheother. How
many times shorter will its wavelength be compared to the wavelength
of the lowest-frequency standing wave, shown in the figure? Based on
this,howmanytimesgreaterwillitsfrequencybe? .Answer,p. 555
Discussion question
A Figurexonp.526showsthesalamanderinthesalamander’sframe
of reference, so that the palm moves. In the palm’s frame, would this
be a traveling wave? Would the worm in example 1 on p. 485 execute a
standing wave in its own frame? Is there anything qualitatively different
about these two animals’ patterns of motion, other than the fact that one
waveistransverseandtheotherlongitudinal?
A pan pipe is an asymmetric
air column, open at the top and
closedatthebottom.
A concert flute looks like an
asymmetric air column, open at
the mouth end and closed at the
other. However, its patterns of
vibration are symmetric, because
the embouchure hole acts like an
openend.
528 Chapter 20 Bounded waves

Summary
Selected vocabulary
reflection . . . . . the bouncing back of part of a wave from a
boundary
transmission . . . the continuation of part of a wave through a
boundary
absorption . . . . the gradual conversion of wave energy into
heating of the medium
standing wave . . a wave pattern that stays in one place
Notation
  . . . . . . . . . . wavelength (Greek letter lambda)
Summary
Whenever a wave encounters the boundary between two media in
which its speeds are di↵erent, part of the wave is reflected and part
is transmitted. The reflection is always reversed front-to-back, but
may also be inverted in amplitude. Whether the reflection is in-
verted depends on how the wave speeds in the two media compare,
e.g., a wave on a string is uninverted when it is reflected back into
a segment of string where its speed is lower. The greater the di↵er-
ence in wave speed between the two media, the greater the fraction
of the wave energy that is reflected. Surprisingly, a wave in a dense
material like wood will be strongly reflected back into the wood at
a wood-air boundary.
A one-dimensional wave confined by highly reflective boundaries on
twosideswilldisplaymotionwhichisperiodic. Forexample, ifboth
reflections are inverting, the wave will have a period equal to twice
thetimerequiredtotraversetheregion,ortothattimedividedbyan
integer. An important special case is a sinusoidal wave; in this case,
the wave forms a stationary pattern composed of a superposition of
sine waves moving in opposite direction.
Summary 529

Problems
Key
p A computerized answer check is available online.
A problem that requires calculus.
? A di cult problem.
R
1 Light travels faster in warmer air. Use this fact to explain the
formation of a mirage appearing like the shiny surface of a pool of
water when there is a layer of hot air above a road. (For simplicity,
pretend that there is actually a sharp boundary between the hot
layer and the cooler layer above it.)
2 (a) Using the equations from optional section 20.2, compute
the amplitude of light that is reflected back into air at an air-water
interface, relativetotheamplitudeoftheincidentwave. Thespeeds
oflightinairandwaterare3.0 108 and2.2 108 m/s, respectively.
⇥ ⇥
(b)Findtheenergyofthereflectedwaveasafractionoftheincident
energy. [Hint: The answers to the two parts are not the same.]
p
3 A concert flute produces its lowest note, at about 262 Hz,
when half of a wavelength fits inside its tube. Compute the length
of the flute. . Answer, p. 556
4 (a) A good tenor saxophone player can play all of the fol-
lowing notes without changing her fingering, simply by altering the
tightness of her lips: E[ (150 Hz), E[ (300 Hz), B[ (450 Hz), and
E[ (600 Hz). How is this possible? (I’m not asking you to analyze
the coupling between the lips, the reed, the mouthpiece, and the air
column, which is very complicated.)
(b) Some saxophone players are known for their ability to use this
technique to play “freak notes,” i.e., notes above the normal range
of the instrument. Why isn’t it possible to play notes below the
C 261.6 Hz normal range using this technique?
D 293.7
5 The table gives the frequencies of the notes that make up the
E 329.6
key of F major, starting from middle C and going up through all
F 349.2
seven notes.
G 392.0
(a) Calculate the first four or five harmonics of C and G, and deter-
A 440.0
mine whether these two notes will be consonant or dissonant. (Re-
B[ 466.2
call that harmonics that di↵er by about 1-10% cause dissonance.)
(b) Do the same for C and B[.
Problem5.
6 Brass and wind instruments go up in pitch as the musician
warms up. As a typical empirical example, a trumpet’s frequency
might go up by about 1%. Let’s consider possible physical reasons
for the change in pitch. (a) Solids generally expand with increas-
ing temperature, because the stronger random motion of the atoms
tendstobumpthemapart. Brassexpandsby1.88 10 5 perdegree
 
⇥
C. Would this tend to raise the pitch, or lower it? Estimate the size
530 Chapter 20 Bounded waves

of the e↵ect in comparison with the observed change in frequency.
(b) The speed of sound in a gas is proportional to the square root of
the absolute temperature, where zero absolute temperature is -273
degrees C. As in part a, analyze the size and direction of the e↵ect.
7 Your exhaled breath contains about 4.5% carbon dioxide, and
is therefore more dense than fresh air by about 2.3%. By analogy
with the treatment of waves on a string in section 19.2, we expect
that the speed of sound will be inversely proportional to the square
root of the density of the gas. Calculate the e↵ect on the frequency
produced by a wind instrument.
Problems 531