# REAL PDF — crowell_lm.pdf, pages 289-294
############################################################

around and around at ever higher speeds. Of course there is some
friction, but there is a net gain in speed with each revolution.
Physicists would lay long odds against the discovery of such a moon
rock, not just because it breaks the rules that magnets normally
obey but because, like the alchemists, they have discovered a very
deepandfundamentalprincipleofnaturewhichforbidscertainthings
from happening. The first alchemist who deserved to be called a
chemist was the one who realized one day, “In all these attempts
to create gold where there was none before, all I’ve been doing is
shu✏ing the same atoms back and forth among di↵erent test tubes.
The only way to increase the amount of gold in my laboratory is to
bring some in through the door.” It was like having some of your
money in a checking account and some in a savings account. Trans-
ferring money from one account into the other doesn’t change the
total amount.
We say that the number of grams of gold is a conserved quantity. In
this context, the word “conserve” does not have its usual meaning
of trying not to waste something. In physics, a conserved quan-
tity is something that you wouldn’t be able to get rid of even if you
wanted to. Conservation laws in physics always refer to a closed sys-
tem, meaning a region of space with boundaries through which the
quantity in question is not passing. In our example, the alchemist’s
Amysteriousmoonrockmakesa
laboratory is a closed system because no gold is coming in or out
perpetualmotionmachine.
through the doors.
Conservation of mass example 1
In figure d, the stream of water is fatter near the mouth of the
faucet,andskinnierlowerdown. Thisisbecausethewaterspeeds
up as it falls. If the cross-sectional area of the stream was equal
all along its length, then the rate of flow through a lower cross-
section would be greater than the rate of flow through a cross-
section higher up. Since the flow is steady, the amount of wa-
ter between the two cross-sections stays constant. The cross-
sectional area of the stream must therefore shrink in inverse pro-
portion to the increasing speed of the falling water. This is an
example of conservation of mass.
In general, the amount of any particular substance is not conserved.
Chemical reactions can change one substance into another, and nu-
clear reactions can even change one element into another. The total
mass of all substances is however conserved:
the law of conservation of mass
The total mass of a closed system always remains constant. Mass
cannotbecreatedordestroyed,butonlytransferredfromonesystem
to another. Example1.
A similar lightbulb eventually lit up in the heads of the people who
Energy 289

had been frustrated trying to build a perpetual motion machine.
In perpetual motion machine a, consider the motion of one of the
balls. It performs a cycle of rising and falling. On the way down it
gains speed, and coming up it slows back down. Having a greater
speedislikehavingmoremoneyinyourcheckingaccount,andbeing
high up is like having more in your savings account. The device is
simplyshu✏ingfundsbackandforthbetweenthetwo. Havingmore
balls doesn’t change anything fundamentally. Not only that, but
friction is always draining o↵ money into a third “bank account:”
heat. The reason we rub our hands together when we’re cold is that
kinetic friction heats things up. The continual buildup in the “heat
account” leaves less and less for the “motion account” and “height
account,” causing the machine eventually to run down.
These insights can be distilled into the following basic principle of
physics:
the law of conservation of energy
It is possible to give a numerical rating, called energy, to the state
of a physical system. The total energy is found by adding up contri-
butions from characteristics of the system such as motion of objects
in it, heating of the objects, and the relative positions of objects
that interact via forces. The total energy of a closed system always
remains constant. Energy cannot be created or destroyed, but only
transferred from one system to another.
The moon rock story violates conservation of energy because the
rock-cylinderandtheballtogetherconstituteaclosedsystem. Once
the ball has made one revolution around the cylinder, its position
relative to the cylinder is exactly the same as before, so the numer-
ical energy rating associated with its position is the same as before.
Since the total amount of energy must remain constant, it is im-
possible for the ball to have a greater speed after one revolution. If
it had picked up speed, it would have more energy associated with
motion, the same amount of energy associated with position, and a
little more energy associated with heating through friction. There
cannot be a net increase in energy.
Converting one form of energy to another example 2
Dropping a rock: The rock loses energy because of its changing
position with respect to the earth. Nearly all that energy is trans-
formed into energy of motion, except for a small amount lost to
heat created by air friction.
Sliding in to home base: The runner’s energy of motion is nearly
all converted into heat via friction with the ground.
Accelerating a car: The gasoline has energy stored in it, which
is released as heat by burning it inside the engine. Perhaps 10%
290 Chapter 11 Conservation of energy

of this heat energy is converted into the car’s energy of motion.
Therestremainsintheformofheat,whichiscarriedawaybythe
exhaust.
Cruising in a car: As you cruise at constant speed in your car, all
the energy of the burning gas is being converted into heat. The
tires and engine get hot, and heat is also dissipated into the air
through the radiator and the exhaust.
Steppingonthebrakes: Alltheenergyofthecar’smotioniscon-
verted into heat in the brake shoes.
Stevin’s machine example 3
The Dutch mathematician and engineer Simon Stevin proposed
theimaginarymachineshowninfiguree,whichhehadinscribed
on his tombstone. This is an interesting example, because it
showsalinkbetweentheforceconceptusedearlierinthiscourse,
and the energy concept being developed now.
The point of the imaginary machine is to show the mechanical
advantage of an inclined plane. In this example, the triangle has
the proportions 3-4-5, but the argument works for any right trian-
gle. We imagine that the chain of balls slides without friction, so
that no energy is ever converted into heat. If we were to slide
the chain clockwise by one step, then each ball would take the
place of the one in front of it, and the over all configuration would
Example3.
be exactly the same. Since energy is something that only de-
pends on the state of the system, the energy would have to be
the same. Similarly for a counterclockwise rotation, no energy of
positionwouldbereleasedbygravity. Thismeansthatifweplace
the chain on the triangle, and release it at rest, it can’t start mov-
ing, because there would be no way for it to convert energy of
position into energy of motion. Thus the chain must be perfectly
balanced. Now by symmetry, the arc of the chain hanging under-
neath the triangle has equal tension at both ends, so removing
this arc wouldn’t affect the balance of the rest of the chain. This
means that a weight of three units hanging vertically balances a
weight of five units hanging diagonally along the hypotenuse.
The mechanical advantage of the inclined plane is therefore 5/3,
which is exactly the same as the result, 1/sin✓, that we got
on p. 223 by analyzing force vectors. What this shows is that
Newton’s laws and conservation laws are not logically separate,
but rather are very closely related descriptions of nature. In the
caseswhereNewton’slawsaretrue,theygivethesameanswers
as the conservation laws. This is an example of a more gen-
eralidea,calledthecorrespondenceprinciple,abouthowscience
progressesovertime. Whenanewer,moregeneraltheoryispro-
posedtoreplaceanoldertheory,thenewtheorymustagreewith
theoldoneintherealmofapplicabilityoftheoldtheory,sincethe
old theory only became accepted as a valid theory by being ver-
Energy 291

ified experimentally in a variety of experiments. In other words,
the new theory must be backward-compatible with the old one.
Even though conservation laws can prove things that Newton’s
lawscan’t(thatperpetualmotionisimpossible,forexample),they
aren’tgoingtodisprove Newton’slawswhenappliedtomechani-
cal systems where we already knew Newton’s laws were valid.
Discussion question
A Hydroelectric power (water flowing over a dam to spin turbines)
Discussion question A. The appearstobecompletelyfree. Doesthisviolateconservationofenergy?
water behind the Hoover Dam If not, then what is the ultimate source of the electrical energy produced
has energy because of its posi- byahydroelectricplant?
tion relative to the planet earth,
B Howdoestheproofinexample3failiftheassumptionofafrictionless
which is attracting it with a gravi-
surfacedoesn’thold?
tationalforce. Lettingwaterdown
tothebottomofthedamconverts
thatenergyintoenergyofmotion. 11.3 A numerical scale of energy
When the water reaches the
Energycomesinavarietyofforms, andphysicistsdidn’tdiscoverall
bottom of the dam, it hits turbine
blades that drive generators, and of them right away. They had to start somewhere, so they picked
its energy of motion is converted one form of energy to use as a standard for creating a numerical
intoelectricalenergy. energyscale. (Infactthehistoryiscomplicated,andseveraldi↵erent
energy units were defined before it was realized that there was a
single general energy concept that deserved a single consistent unit
of measurement.) One practical approach is to define an energy
unit based on heating water. The SI unit of energy is the joule,
J, (rhymes with “cool”), named after the British physicist James
Joule. One Joule is the amount of energy required in order to heat
0.24 g of water by 1 C. The number 0.24 is not worth memorizing.
 
Note that heat, which is a form of energy, is completely di↵erent
from temperature, which is not. Twice as much heat energy is re-
quired to prepare two cups of co↵ee as to make one, but two cups of
co↵ee mixed together don’t have double the temperature. In other
words, the temperature of an object tells us how hot it is, but the
heat energy contained in an object also takes into account the ob-
ject’s mass and what it is made of.1
Laterwewillencounterotherquantitiesthatareconservedinphysics,
such as momentum and angular momentum, and the method for
defining them will be similar to the one we have used for energy:
pick some standard form of it, and then measure other forms by
comparison with this standard. The flexible and adaptable nature
of this procedure is part of what has made conservation laws such a
durable basis for the evolution of physics.
1In standard, formal terminology, there is another, finer distinction. The
word “heat” is used only to indicate an amount of energy that is transferred,
whereas“thermalenergy”indicatesanamountofenergycontainedinanobject.
I’m informal on this point, and refer to both as heat, but you should be aware
of the distinction.
292 Chapter 11 Conservation of energy

Heating a swimming pool example 4
. If electricity costs 3.9 cents per MJ (1 MJ = 1 megajoule = 106
J), how much does it cost to heat a 26000-gallon swimming pool
from 10 C to 18 C?
   
. Converting gallons to cm3 gives
3780 cm3
26000 gallons = 9.8 107 cm3.
⇥ 1 gallon ⇥
Water has a density of 1 gram per cubic centimeter, so the mass
of the water is 9.8 107 g. One joule is sufficient to heat 0.24 g
⇥
by 1 C, so the energy needed to heat the swimming pool is
 
9.8 107 g 8 C
1 J ⇥   = 3.3 109 J
⇥ 0.24 g ⇥ 1 C ⇥
 
= 3.3 103 MJ.
⇥
The cost of the electricity is (3.3 103 MJ)($0.039/MJ)=$130.
⇥
Irish coffee example 5
. You make a cup of Irish coffee out of 300 g of coffee at 100 C
 
and 30 g of pure ethyl alcohol at 20 C. One Joule is enough en-
 
ergy to produce a change of 1 C in 0.42 g of ethyl alcohol (i.e.,
 
alcohol is easier to heat than water). What temperature is the
final mixture?
.Addingupalltheenergyaftermixinghastogivethesameresult
as the total before mixing. We let the subscript i stand for the
initialsituation,beforemixing,andf forthefinalsituation,anduse
subscripts c for the coffee and a for the alcohol. In this notation,
we have
total initial energy = total final energy
E +E = E +E .
ci ai cf af
Weassumecoffee hasthesameheat-carryingproperties aswa-
ter. Our information about the heat-carrying properties of the two
substancesisstatedintermsofthechangeinenergyrequiredfor
acertainchange intemperature,sowerearrangetheequationto
express everything in terms of energy differences:
E E = E E .
af ai ci cf
   
Using the given ratios of temperature change to energy change,
we have
E E = (T T )(m )/(0.24 g)
ci cf ci cf c
   
E E = (T T )(m )/(0.42 g)
af ai af ai a
   
Setting these two quantities to be equal, we have
(T T )(m )/(0.42 g) = (T T )(m )/(0.24 g).
af ai a ci cf c
   
A numerical scale of energy 293