# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 153-156
############################################################

3 • Chapter Review 141
appropriate equation to solve for it. After
choosing the equation, show your steps in
solving for the unknown, check your units, and
discuss whether the answer is reasonable. (d)
What is the car’s final velocity? Solve for this
unknown in the same manner as in (c), showing
all steps explicitly.
54 . Unreasonable results At the end of a race, a
runner accelerates opposite to the motion from
a velocity of 9.00 m/s at a rate of 2.00 m/s2. (a)
How far does she travel in the next 5.00 s? (b)
What is her final velocity? (c) Evaluate the result.
48 . A particle has a constant acceleration of 6.0
Does it make sense?
m/s2. (a) If its initial velocity is 2.0 m/s, at what
time is its displacement 5.0 m? (b) What is its 55 . Blood is accelerated from rest to 30.0 cm/s in a
velocity at that time? distance of 1.80 cm by the left ventricle of the
heart. (a) Make a sketch of the situation. (b) List
49 . At t = 10 s, a particle is moving from left to right
the knowns in this problem. (c) How long does
with a speed of 5.0 m/s. At t = 20 s, the particle
the acceleration take? To solve this part, first
is moving right to left with a speed of 8.0 m/s.
identify the unknown, then discuss how you
Assuming the particle’s acceleration is constant,
chose the appropriate equation to solve for it.
determine (a) its acceleration, (b) its initial
After choosing the equation, show your steps in
velocity, and (c) the instant when its velocity is
solving for the unknown, checking your units. (d)
zero.
Is the answer reasonable when compared with
50 . A well-thrown ball is caught in a well-padded the time for a heartbeat?
mitt. If the acceleration of the ball
56 . During a slap shot, a hockey player accelerates
is , and 1.85 ms
the puck from a velocity of 8.00 m/s to 40.0 m/s
elapses from the time the ball
in the same direction. If this shot takes
first touches the mitt until it stops, what is the
, what is the distance over which
initial velocity of the ball?
the puck accelerates?
51 . A bullet in a gun is accelerated from the firing
57 . A powerful motorcycle can accelerate from rest
chamber to the end of the barrel at an average
to 26.8 m/s (100 km/h) in only 3.90 s. (a) What
rate of for .
is its average acceleration? (b) Assuming
What is its muzzle velocity (that is, its final
constant acceleration, how far does it travel in
velocity)?
that time?
52 . (a) A light-rail commuter train accelerates at a
58 . Freight trains can produce only relatively small
rate of 1.35 m/s2. How long does it take to reach
accelerations. (a) What is the final velocity of a
its top speed of 80.0 km/h, starting from rest?
freight train that accelerates at a rate of
(b) The same train ordinarily accelerates
for 8.00 min, starting with an initial
opposite to the motion at a rate of 1.65 m/s2.
velocity of 4.00 m/s? (b) If the train can slow
How long does it take to come to a stop from its
down at a rate of , how long will it
top speed? (c) In emergencies, the train can
take to come to a stop from this velocity? (c)
accelerate opposite to the motion more rapidly,
How far will it travel in each case?
coming to rest from 80.0 km/h in 8.30 s. What is
its emergency acceleration in meters per second 59 . A fireworks shell is accelerated from rest to a
squared? velocity of 65.0 m/s over a distance of 0.250 m.
(a) Calculate the acceleration. (b) How long did
53 . While entering a freeway, a car accelerates from
the acceleration last?
rest at a rate of 2.40 m/s2 for 12.0 s. (a) Draw a
sketch of the situation. (b) List the knowns in 60 . A swan on a lake gets airborne by flapping its
this problem. (c) How far does the car travel in wings and running on top of the water. (a) If the
those 12.0 s? To solve this part, first identify the swan must reach a velocity of 6.00 m/s to take
unknown, then indicate how you chose the off and it accelerates from rest at an average

142 3 • Chapter Review
rate of , how far will it travel before 3.5 Free Fall
becoming airborne? (b) How long does this take?
66 . Calculate the displacement and velocity at times
61 . A woodpecker’s brain is specially protected from of (a) 0.500 s, (b) 1.00 s, (c) 1.50 s, and (d) 2.00
large accelerations by tendon-like attachments s for a ball thrown straight up with an initial
inside the skull. While pecking on a tree, the velocity of 15.0 m/s. Take the point of release to
woodpecker’s head comes to a stop from an be .
initial velocity of 0.600 m/s in a distance of only
67 . Calculate the displacement and velocity at times
2.00 mm. (a) Find the acceleration in meters per
of (a) 0.500 s, (b) 1.00 s, (c) 1.50 s, (d) 2.00 s,
second squared and in multiples of g, where g =
and (e) 2.50 s for a rock thrown straight down
9.80 m/s2. (b) Calculate the stopping time. (c)
with an initial velocity of 14.0 m/s from the
The tendons cradling the brain stretch, making
Verrazano Narrows Bridge in New York City. The
its stopping distance 4.50 mm (greater than the
roadway of this bridge is 70.0 m above the
head and, hence, less acceleration of the brain).
water.
What is the brain’s acceleration, expressed in
multiples of g? 68 . A basketball referee tosses the ball straight up
for the starting tip-off. At what velocity must a
62 . An unwary football player collides with a padded
basketball player leave the ground to rise 1.25
goalpost while running at a velocity of 7.50 m/s
m above the floor in an attempt to get the ball?
and comes to a full stop after compressing the
padding and his body 0.350 m. (a) What is his 69 . A rescue helicopter is hovering over a person
acceleration? (b) How long does the collision whose boat has sunk. One of the rescuers
last? throws a life preserver straight down to the
victim with an initial velocity of 1.40 m/s and
63 . A care package is dropped out of a cargo plane
observes that it takes 1.8 s to reach the water.
and lands in the forest. If we assume the care
(a) List the knowns in this problem. (b) How high
package speed on impact is 54 m/s (123 mph),
above the water was the preserver released?
then what is its acceleration? Assume the trees
Note that the downdraft of the helicopter
and snow stops it over a distance of 3.0 m.
reduces the effects of air resistance on the
64 . An express train passes through a station. It falling life preserver, so that an acceleration
enters with an initial velocity of 22.0 m/s and equal to that of gravity is reasonable.
accelerates opposite to the motion at a rate of
70 . Unreasonable results A dolphin in an aquatic
as it goes through. The station is
show jumps straight up out of the water at a
210.0 m long. (a) How fast is it going when the
velocity of 15.0 m/s. (a) List the knowns in this
nose leaves the station? (b) How long is the nose
problem. (b) How high does his body rise above
of the train in the station? (c) If the train is 130
the water? To solve this part, first note that the
m long, what is the velocity of the end of the
final velocity is now a known, and identify its
train as it leaves? (d) When does the end of the
value. Then, identify the unknown and discuss
train leave the station?
how you chose the appropriate equation to solve
65 . Unreasonable results Dragsters can actually for it. After choosing the equation, show your
reach a top speed of 145.0 m/s in only 4.45 s. steps in solving for the unknown, checking units,
(a) Calculate the average acceleration for such a and discuss whether the answer is reasonable.
dragster. (b) Find the final velocity of this (c) How long a time is the dolphin in the air?
dragster starting from rest and accelerating at Neglect any effects resulting from his size or
the rate found in (a) for 402.0 m (a quarter mile) orientation.
without using any information on time. (c) Why is
71 . A diver bounces straight up from a diving board,
the final velocity greater than that used to find
avoiding the diving board on the way down, and
the average acceleration? (Hint: Consider
falls feet first into a pool. She starts with a
whether the assumption of constant
velocity of 4.00 m/s and her takeoff point is 1.80
acceleration is valid for a dragster. If not, discuss
m above the pool. (a) What is her highest point
whether the acceleration would be greater at the
above the board? (b) How long a time are her
beginning or end of the run and what effect that
feet in the air? (c) What is her velocity when her
would have on the final velocity.)
feet hit the water?
Access for free at openstax.org

3 • Chapter Review 143
72 . (a) Calculate the height of a cliff if it takes 2.35 s the tourist, which would become negligible
for a rock to hit the ground when it is thrown anyway if hit)? The speed of sound is 335.0 m/s
straight up from the cliff with an initial velocity of on this day.
8.00 m/s. (b) How long a time would it take to
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from
reach the ground if it is thrown straight down
Acceleration
with the same speed?
78 . The acceleration of a particle varies with time
73 . A very strong, but inept, shot putter puts the
according to the equation .
shot straight up vertically with an initial velocity
Initially, the velocity and position are zero. (a)
of 11.0 m/s. How long a time does he have to get
What is the velocity as a function of time? (b)
out of the way if the shot was released at a
What is the position as a function of time?
height of 2.20 m and he is 1.80 m tall?
74 . You throw a ball straight up with an initial
79 . Between t = 0 and t = t0, a rocket moves straight
upward with an acceleration given by
velocity of 15.0 m/s. It passes a tree branch on
, where A and B are constants.
the way up at a height of 7.0 m. How much
(a) If x is in meters and t is in seconds, what are
additional time elapses before the ball passes
the units of A and B? (b) If the rocket starts from
the tree branch on the way back down?
rest, how does the velocity vary between t = 0
75 . A kangaroo can jump over an object 2.50 m high. and t = t0? (c) If its initial position is zero, what is
(a) Considering just its vertical motion, calculate the rocket’s position as a function of time during
its vertical speed when it leaves the ground. (b) this same time interval?
How long a time is it in the air?
80 . The velocity of a particle moving along the x-axis
76 . Standing at the base of one of the cliffs of Mt.
varies with time according to ,
Arapiles in Victoria, Australia, a hiker hears a
where A = 2 m/s, B = 0.25 m, and
rock break loose from a height of 105.0 m. He
. Determine the acceleration
can’t see the rock right away, but then does,
and position of the particle at t = 2.0 s and t =
1.50 s later. (a) How far above the hiker is the
5.0 s. Assume that .
rock when he can see it? (b) How much time
does he have to move before the rock hits his 81 . A particle at rest leaves the origin with its
head? velocity increasing with time according to v(t) =
3.2t m/s. At 5.0 s, the particle’s velocity starts
77 . There is a 250-m-high cliff at Half Dome in
decreasing according to [16.0 – 1.5(t – 5.0)] m/
Yosemite National Park in California. Suppose a
s. This decrease continues until t = 11.0 s, after
boulder breaks loose from the top of this cliff. (a)
which the particle’s velocity remains constant at
How fast will it be going when it strikes the
7.0 m/s. (a) What is the acceleration of the
ground? (b) Assuming a reaction time of 0.300 s,
particle as a function of time? (b) What is the
how long a time will a tourist at the bottom have
position of the particle at t = 2.0 s, t = 7.0 s, and
to get out of the way after hearing the sound of
t = 12.0 s?
the rock breaking loose (neglecting the height of
Additional Problems
82 . Professional baseball player Nolan Ryan could planes. Ignore the curvature of Earth and the
pitch a baseball at approximately 160.0 km/h. At difference in altitude between the two cities.
that average velocity, how long did it take a ball
84 . Unreasonable Results A cyclist rides 16.0 km
thrown by Ryan to reach home plate, which is
east, then 8.0 km west, then 8.0 km east, then
18.4 m from the pitcher’s mound? Compare this
32.0 km west, and finally 11.2 km east. If his
with the average reaction time of a human to a
average velocity is 24 km/h, how long did it take
visual stimulus, which is 0.25 s.
him to complete the trip? Is this a reasonable
83 . An airplane leaves Chicago and makes the time?
3000-km trip to Los Angeles in 5.0 h. A second
85 . An object has an acceleration of . At
plane leaves Chicago one-half hour later and
, its velocity is . Determine
arrives in Los Angeles at the same time.
the object’s velocities at and .
Compare the average velocities of the two