# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 514-518
############################################################

502 10 • Chapter Review
gives the change in angular velocity: up an object, multiplied by the square of the
distance of each ‘piece of mass’ to the axis. In
. integral form the moment of inertia is
.
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities • Moment of inertia is larger when an object’s mass
is farther from the axis of rotation.
• The linear kinematic equations have their
• It is possible to find the moment of inertia of an
rotational counterparts such that there is a
object about a new axis of rotation once it is
mapping .
known for a parallel axis. This is called the
• A system undergoing uniform circular motion has
parallel axis theorem given by
a constant angular velocity, but points at a
, where d is
distance r from the rotation axis have a linear
the distance from the initial axis to the parallel
centripetal acceleration.
axis.
• A system undergoing nonuniform circular motion
• Moment of inertia for a compound object is
has an angular acceleration and therefore has
simply the sum of the moments of inertia for
both a linear centripetal and linear tangential
each individual object that makes up the
acceleration at a point a distance r from the axis
compound object.
of rotation.
• The total linear acceleration is the vector sum of 10.6 Torque
the centripetal acceleration vector and the
• The magnitude of a torque about a fixed axis is
tangential acceleration vector. Since the
calculated by finding the lever arm to the point
centripetal and tangential acceleration vectors
where the force is applied and using the relation
are perpendicular to each other for circular
, where is the perpendicular
motion, the magnitude of the total linear
distance from the axis to the line upon which the
acceleration is .
force vector lies.
• The sign of the torque is found using the right
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
hand rule. If the page is the plane containing
• The rotational kinetic energy is the kinetic energy
and , then is out of the page for positive
of rotation of a rotating rigid body or system of
torques and into the page for negative torques.
particles, and is given by , where I is • The net torque can be found from summing the
the moment of inertia, or “rotational mass” of the individual torques about a given axis.
rigid body or system of particles.
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
• The moment of inertia for a system of point
particles rotating about a fixed axis is • Newton’s second law for rotation, ,
, where is the mass of the point
says that the sum of the torques on a rotating
particle and is the distance of the point system about a fixed axis equals the product of
particle to the rotation axis. Because of the the moment of inertia and the angular
term, the moment of inertia increases as the acceleration. This is the rotational analog to
square of the distance to the fixed rotational axis. Newton’s second law of linear motion.
The moment of inertia is the rotational • In the vector form of Newton’s second law for
counterpart to the mass in linear motion. rotation, the torque vector is in the same
• In systems that are both rotating and translating, direction as the angular acceleration . If the
conservation of mechanical energy can be used if angular acceleration of a rotating system is
there are no nonconservative forces at work. The positive, the torque on the system is also
total mechanical energy is then conserved and is positive, and if the angular acceleration is
the sum of the rotational and translational kinetic negative, the torque is negative.
energies, and the gravitational potential energy.
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
• The incremental work dW in rotating a rigid body
• Moments of inertia can be found by summing or about a fixed axis is the sum of the torques about
integrating over every ‘piece of mass’ that makes the axis times the incremental angle .
Access for free at openstax.org

10 • Chapter Review 503
• The total work done to rotate a rigid body work done to the change in rotational kinetic
through an angle about a fixed axis is the sum energy: where
of the torques integrated over the angular • The power delivered to a system that is rotating
displacement. If the torque is a constant as a about a fixed axis is the torque times the angular
function of , then . velocity, .
• The work-energy theorem relates the rotational
Conceptual Questions
10.1 Rotational Variables centripetal acceleration, or both when: (a) the
plate starts to spin faster? (b) The plate rotates
1 . A clock is mounted on the wall. As you look at it,
at constant angular velocity? (c) The plate slows
what is the direction of the angular velocity
to a halt?
vector of the second hand?
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
2 . What is the value of the angular acceleration of
the second hand of the clock on the wall? 12 . What if another planet the same size as Earth
were put into orbit around the Sun along with
3 . A baseball bat is swung. Do all points on the bat
Earth. Would the moment of inertia of the
have the same angular velocity? The same
system increase, decrease, or stay the same?
tangential speed?
13 . A solid sphere is rotating about an axis through
4 . The blades of a blender on a counter are rotating
its center at a constant rotation rate. Another
clockwise as you look into it from the top. If the
hollow sphere of the same mass and radius is
blender is put to a greater speed what direction
rotating about its axis through the center at the
is the angular acceleration of the blades?
same rotation rate. Which sphere has a greater
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration rotational kinetic energy?
5 . If a rigid body has a constant angular 10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
acceleration, what is the functional form of the
14 . If a child walks toward the center of a merry-go-
angular velocity in terms of the time variable?
round, does the moment of inertia increase or
6 . If a rigid body has a constant angular decrease?
acceleration, what is the functional form of the
15 . A discus thrower rotates with a discus in his
angular position?
hand before letting it go. (a) How does his
7 . If the angular acceleration of a rigid body is zero, moment of inertia change after releasing the
what is the functional form of the angular discus? (b) What would be a good approximation
velocity? to use in calculating the moment of inertia of the
discus thrower and discus?
8 . A massless tether with a masses tied to both
ends rotates about a fixed axis through the 16 . Does increasing the number of blades on a
center. Can the total acceleration of the tether/ propeller increase or decrease its moment of
mass combination be zero if the angular velocity inertia, and why?
is constant?
17 . The moment of inertia of a long rod spun around
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities an axis through one end perpendicular to its
length is . Why is this moment of inertia
9 . Explain why centripetal acceleration changes
greater than it would be if you spun a point mass
the direction of velocity in circular motion but
m at the location of the center of mass of the rod
not its magnitude.
(at L/2) (that would be )?
10 . In circular motion, a tangential acceleration can
18 . Why is the moment of inertia of a hoop that has
change the magnitude of the velocity but not its
a mass M and a radius R greater than the
direction. Explain your answer.
moment of inertia of a disk that has the same
11 . Suppose a piece of food is on the edge of a mass and radius?
rotating microwave oven plate. Does it
experience nonzero tangential acceleration,

504 10 • Chapter Review
10.6 Torque 24 . Can a set of forces have a net force that is zero
and a net torque that is not zero?
19 . What three factors affect the torque created by a
force relative to a specific pivot point? 25 . In the expression can ever be less
than the lever arm? Can it be equal to the lever
20 . Give an example in which a small force exerts a
arm?
large torque. Give another example in which a
large force exerts a small torque.
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
21 . When reducing the mass of a racing bike, the
26 . If you were to stop a spinning wheel with a
greatest benefit is realized from reducing the
constant force, where on the wheel would you
mass of the tires and wheel rims. Why does this
apply the force to produce the maximum
allow a racer to achieve greater accelerations
negative acceleration?
than would an identical reduction in the mass of
the bicycle’s frame? 27 . A rod is pivoted about one end. Two forces
are applied to it. Under what
22 . Can a single force produce a zero torque?
circumstances will the rod not rotate?
23 . Can a set of forces have a net torque that is zero
and a net force that is not zero?
Problems
10.1 Rotational Variables 35 . On takeoff, the propellers on a UAV (unmanned
aerial vehicle) increase their angular velocity for
28 . Calculate the angular velocity of Earth.
3.0 s from rest at a rate of
29 . A track star runs a 400-m race on a 400-m where t is measured in seconds. (a) What is the
circular track in 45 s. What is his angular velocity instantaneous angular velocity of the propellers
assuming a constant speed? at ? (b) What is the angular
acceleration?
30 . A wheel rotates at a constant rate of
. (a) What is its angular 36 . The angular position of a rod varies as
velocity in radians per second? (b) Through what radians from time . The rod has two beads on
angle does it turn in 10 s? Express the solution it as shown in the following figure, one at 10 cm
in radians and degrees. from the rotation axis and the other at 20 cm from
the rotation axis. (a) What is the instantaneous
31 . A particle moves 3.0 m along a circle of radius
angular velocity of the rod at (b) What is
1.5 m. (a) Through what angle does it rotate? (b)
the angular acceleration of the rod? (c) What are
If the particle makes this trip in 1.0 s at a
the tangential speeds of the beads at (d)
constant speed, what is its angular velocity? (c)
What are the tangential accelerations of the beads
What is its acceleration?
at (e) What are the centripetal
32 . A compact disc rotates at 500 rev/min. If the accelerations of the beads at
diameter of the disc is 120 mm, (a) what is the
tangential speed of a point at the edge of the
disc? (b) At a point halfway to the center of the
disc?
33 . Unreasonable results. The propeller of an
aircraft is spinning at 10 rev/s when the pilot
shuts off the engine. The propeller reduces its
angular velocity at a constant for a
time period of 40 s. What is the rotation rate of
the propeller in 40 s? Is this a reasonable
situation?
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
34 . A gyroscope slows from an initial rate of 32.0
37 . A wheel has a constant angular acceleration of
rad/s at a rate of . How long does it
. Starting from rest, it turns through
take to come to rest?
Access for free at openstax.org

10 • Chapter Review 505
300 rad. (a) What is its final angular velocity? (b)
How much time elapses while it turns through
the 300 radians?
38 . During a 6.0-s time interval, a flywheel with a
constant angular acceleration turns through 500
radians and acquires an angular velocity of 100
rad/s. (a) What is the angular velocity at the
beginning of the 6.0 s? (b) What is the angular
acceleration of the flywheel?
39 . The angular velocity of a rotating rigid body 45 . A rod of length 20 cm has two beads attached to
increases from 500 to 1500 rev/min in 120 s. (a) its ends. The rod with beads starts rotating from
What is the angular acceleration of the body? (b) rest. If the beads are to have a tangential speed
Through what angle does it turn in this 120 s? of 20 m/s in 7 s, what is the angular acceleration
of the rod to achieve this?
40 . A flywheel slows from 600 to 400 rev/min while
rotating through 40 revolutions. (a) What is the 10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
angular acceleration of the flywheel? (b) How
46 . At its peak, a tornado is 60.0 m in diameter and
much time elapses during the 40 revolutions?
carries 500 km/h winds. What is its angular
41 . A wheel 1.0 m in radius rotates with an angular velocity in revolutions per second?
acceleration of . (a) If the wheel’s
47 . A man stands on a merry-go-round that is
initial angular velocity is 2.0 rad/s, what is its
rotating at 2.5 rad/s. If the coefficient of static
angular velocity after 10 s? (b) Through what
friction between the man’s shoes and the merry-
angle does it rotate in the 10-s interval? (c) What
go-round is , how far from the axis of
are the tangential speed and acceleration of a
rotation can he stand without sliding?
point on the rim of the wheel at the end of the
10-s interval? 48 . An ultracentrifuge accelerates from rest to
100,000 rpm in 2.00 min. (a) What is the
42 . A vertical wheel with a diameter of 50 cm starts
average angular acceleration in ? (b) What
from rest and rotates with a constant angular
is the tangential acceleration of a point 9.50 cm
acceleration of around a fixed axis
from the axis of rotation? (c) What is the
through its center counterclockwise. (a) Where
centripetal acceleration in and multiples of
is the point that is initially at the bottom of the
g of this point at full rpm? (d) What is the total
wheel at (b) What is the point’s linear
distance traveled during the acceleration by a
acceleration at this instant?
point 9.5 cm from the axis of rotation of the
43 . A circular disk of radius 10 cm has a constant ultracentrifuge?
angular acceleration of ; at its
49 . A wind turbine is rotating counterclockwise at
angular velocity is 2.0 rad/s. (a) Determine the
0.5 rev/s and slows to a stop in 10 s. Its blades
disk’s angular velocity at . (b) What is
are 20 m in length. (a) What is the angular
the angle it has rotated through during this time?
acceleration of the turbine? (b) What is the
(c) What is the tangential acceleration of a point
centripetal acceleration of the tip of the blades
on the disk at
at (c) What is the magnitude and
44 . The angular velocity vs. time for a fan on a direction of the total linear acceleration of the
hovercraft is shown below. (a) What is the angle tip of the blade that lies along the positive x-axis
through which the fan blades rotate in the first 8 at
seconds? (b) Verify your result using the
50 . What is (a) the angular speed and (b) the linear
kinematic equations.
speed of a point on Earth’s surface at latitude
N. Take the radius of the Earth to be 6309
km. (c) At what latitude would your linear speed
be 10 m/s?
51 . A child with mass 40 kg sits on the edge of a