# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 162-171
############################################################

150 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.4 Two position vectors are drawn from the center of Earth, which is the origin of the coordinate system, with the y-axis as north
and the x-axis as east. The vector between them is the displacement of the satellite.
In unit vector notation, the position vectors are
Evaluating the sine and cosine, we have
Now we can find , the displacement of the satellite:
The magnitude of the displacement is The angle the displacement
makes with the x-axis is
Significance
Plotting the displacement gives information and meaning to the unit vector solution to the problem. When plotting
the displacement, we need to include its components as well as its magnitude and the angle it makes with a chosen
axis—in this case, the x-axis (Figure 4.5).
Access for free at openstax.org

4.1 • Displacement and Velocity Vectors 151
FIGURE 4.5 Displacement vector with components, angle, and magnitude.
Note that the satellite took a curved path along its circular orbit to get from its initial position to its final position in
this example. It also could have traveled 4787 km east, then 11,557 km south to arrive at the same location. Both of
these paths are longer than the length of the displacement vector. In fact, the displacement vector gives the
shortest path between two points in one, two, or three dimensions.
Many applications in physics can have a series of displacements, as discussed in the previous chapter. The total
displacement is the sum of the individual displacements, only this time, we need to be careful, because we are
adding vectors. We illustrate this concept with an example of Brownian motion.
EXAMPLE 4.2
Brownian Motion
Brownian motion is a chaotic random motion of particles suspended in a fluid, resulting from collisions with the
molecules of the fluid. This motion is three-dimensional. The displacements in numerical order of a particle
undergoing Brownian motion could look like the following, in micrometers (Figure 4.6):
What is the total displacement of the particle from the origin?

152 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.6 Trajectory of a particle undergoing random displacements of Brownian motion. The total displacement is shown in red.
Solution
We form the sum of the displacements and add them as vectors:
To complete the solution, we express the displacement as a magnitude and direction,
with respect to the x-axis in the xz-plane.
Significance
From the figure we can see the magnitude of the total displacement is less than the sum of the magnitudes of the
individual displacements.
Velocity Vector
In the previous chapter we found the instantaneous velocity by calculating the derivative of the position function
with respect to time. We can do the same operation in two and three dimensions, but we use vectors. The
instantaneous velocity vector is now
4.4
Let’s look at the relative orientation of the position vector and velocity vector graphically. In Figure 4.7 we show the
vectors and which give the position of a particle moving along a path represented by the gray line. As
goes to zero, the velocity vector, given by Equation 4.4, becomes tangent to the path of the particle at time t.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.1 • Displacement and Velocity Vectors 153
FIGURE 4.7 A particle moves along a path given by the gray line. In the limit as approaches zero, the velocity vector becomes tangent to
the path of the particle.
Equation 4.4 can also be written in terms of the components of Since
we can write
4.5
where
4.6
If only the average velocity is of concern, we have the vector equivalent of the one-dimensional average velocity for
two and three dimensions:
4.7
EXAMPLE 4.3
Calculating the Velocity Vector
The position function of a particle is (a) What is the instantaneous velocity
and speed at t = 2.0 s? (b) What is the average velocity between 1.0 s and 3.0 s?
Solution
Using Equation 4.5 and Equation 4.6, and taking the derivative of the position function with respect to time, we find
(a)
Speed
(b) From Equation 4.7,
Significance
We see the average velocity is the same as the instantaneous velocity at t = 2.0 s, as a result of the velocity function

154 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
being linear. This need not be the case in general. In fact, most of the time, instantaneous and average velocities are
not the same.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.1
The position function of a particle is (a) What is the instantaneous velocity at t = 3 s? (b) Is the
average velocity between 2 s and 4 s equal to the instantaneous velocity at t = 3 s?
The Independence of Perpendicular Motions
When we look at the three-dimensional equations for position and velocity written in unit vector notation, Equation
4.2 and Equation 4.5, we see the components of these equations are separate and unique functions of time that do
not depend on one another. Motion along the x direction has no part of its motion along the y and z directions, and
similarly for the other two coordinate axes. Thus, the motion of an object in two or three dimensions can be divided
into separate, independent motions along the perpendicular axes of the coordinate system in which the motion
takes place.
To illustrate this concept with respect to displacement, consider a woman walking from point A to point B in a city
with square blocks. The woman taking the path from A to B may walk east for so many blocks and then north (two
perpendicular directions) for another set of blocks to arrive at B. How far she walks east is affected only by her
motion eastward. Similarly, how far she walks north is affected only by her motion northward.
INDEPENDENCE OF MOTION
In the kinematic description of motion, we are able to treat the horizontal and vertical components of motion
separately. In many cases, motion in the horizontal direction does not affect motion in the vertical direction, and
vice versa.
An example illustrating the independence of vertical and horizontal motions is given by two baseballs. One baseball
is dropped from rest. At the same instant, another is thrown horizontally from the same height and it follows a
curved path. A stroboscope captures the positions of the balls at fixed time intervals as they fall (Figure 4.8).
Access for free at openstax.org

4.2 • Acceleration Vector 155
FIGURE 4.8 A diagram of the motions of two identical balls: one falls from rest and the other has an initial horizontal velocity. Each
subsequent position is an equal time interval. Arrows represent the horizontal and vertical velocities at each position. The ball on the right
has an initial horizontal velocity whereas the ball on the left has no horizontal velocity. Despite the difference in horizontal velocities, the
vertical velocities and positions are identical for both balls, which shows the vertical and horizontal motions are independent.
It is remarkable that for each flash of the strobe, the vertical positions of the two balls are the same. This similarity
implies vertical motion is independent of whether the ball is moving horizontally. (Assuming no air resistance, the
vertical motion of a falling object is influenced by gravity only, not by any horizontal forces.) Careful examination of
the ball thrown horizontally shows it travels the same horizontal distance between flashes. This is because there are
no additional forces on the ball in the horizontal direction after it is thrown. This result means horizontal velocity is
constant and is affected neither by vertical motion nor by gravity (which is vertical). Note this case is true for ideal
conditions only. In the real world, air resistance affects the speed of the balls in both directions.
The two-dimensional curved path of the horizontally thrown ball is composed of two independent one-dimensional
motions (horizontal and vertical). The key to analyzing such motion, called projectile motion, is to resolve it into
motions along perpendicular directions. Resolving two-dimensional motion into perpendicular components is
possible because the components are independent.
4.2 Acceleration Vector
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the acceleration vector given the velocity function in unit vector notation.
• Describe the motion of a particle with a constant acceleration in three dimensions.
• Use the one-dimensional motion equations along perpendicular axes to solve a problem in two or three
dimensions with a constant acceleration.
• Express the acceleration in unit vector notation.
Instantaneous Acceleration
In addition to obtaining the displacement and velocity vectors of an object in motion, we often want to know its
acceleration vector at any point in time along its trajectory. This acceleration vector is the instantaneous
acceleration and it can be obtained from the derivative with respect to time of the velocity function, as we have seen
in a previous chapter. The only difference in two or three dimensions is that these are now vector quantities. Taking
the derivative with respect to time we find

156 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
4.8
The acceleration in terms of components is
4.9
​
Also, since the velocity is the derivative of the position function, we can write the acceleration in terms of the second
derivative of the position function:
4.10
EXAMPLE 4.4
Finding an Acceleration Vector
A particle has a velocity of (a) What is the acceleration function? (b) What is the
acceleration vector at t = 2.0 s? Find its magnitude and direction.
Solution
(a) We take the first derivative with respect to time of the velocity function to find the acceleration. The derivative is
taken component by component:
(b) Evaluating gives us the direction in unit vector notation. The magnitude of
the acceleration is
Significance
In this example we find that acceleration has a time dependence and is changing throughout the motion. Let’s
consider a different velocity function for the particle.
EXAMPLE 4.5
Finding a Particle Acceleration
A particle has a position function ​ (a) What is the velocity? (b) What is the
acceleration? (c) Describe the motion from t = 0 s.
Strategy
We can gain some insight into the problem by looking at the position function. It is linear in y and z, so we know the
acceleration in these directions is zero when we take the second derivative. Also, note that the position in the x
direction is zero for t = 0 s and t = 10 s.
Solution
(a) Taking the derivative with respect to time of the position function, we find
The velocity function is linear in time in the x direction and is constant in the y and z directions.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.2 • Acceleration Vector 157
(b) Taking the derivative of the velocity function, we find
The acceleration vector is a constant in the negative x-direction.
(c) The trajectory of the particle can be seen in Figure 4.9. Let’s look in the y and z directions first. The particle’s
position increases steadily as a function of time with a constant velocity in these directions. In the x direction,
however, the particle follows a path in positive x until t = 5 s, when it reverses direction. We know this from looking
at the velocity function, which becomes zero at this time and negative thereafter. We also know this because the
acceleration is negative and constant—meaning, the particle is accelerating in the opposite direction. The particle’s
position reaches 25 m, where it then reverses direction and begins to accelerate in the negative x direction. The
position reaches zero at t = 10 s.
FIGURE 4.9 The particle starts at point (x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0) with position vector as shown with red stars. The projection of the trajectory
onto the xy-plane is shown with blue dots. The values of y and z increase linearly as a function of time, whereas x has a turning point at t = 5
s and 25 m, when it reverses direction. At this point, the x component of the velocity becomes negative. At t = 10 s, the particle is back to 0
m in the x direction.
Significance
By graphing the trajectory of the particle, we can better understand its motion, given by the numerical results of the
kinematic equations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.2
Suppose the acceleration function has the form where a, b, and c are constants. What can
be said about the functional form of the velocity function?
Constant Acceleration
Multidimensional motion with constant acceleration can be treated the same way as shown in the previous chapter
for one-dimensional motion. Earlier we showed that three-dimensional motion is equivalent to three one-

158 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
dimensional motions, each along an axis perpendicular to the others. To develop the relevant equations in each
direction, let’s consider the two-dimensional problem of a particle moving in the xy plane with constant
acceleration, ignoring the z-component for the moment. The acceleration vector is
Each component of the motion has a separate set of equations similar to Equation 3.10–Equation 3.14 of the
previous chapter on one-dimensional motion. We show only the equations for position and velocity in the x- and
y-directions. A similar set of kinematic equations could be written for motion in the z-direction:
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
Here the subscript 0 denotes the initial position or velocity. Equation 4.11 to Equation 4.18 can be substituted into
Equation 4.2 and Equation 4.5 without the z-component to obtain the position vector and velocity vector as a
function of time in two dimensions:
The following example illustrates a practical use of the kinematic equations in two dimensions.
EXAMPLE 4.6
A Skier
Figure 4.10 shows a skier moving with an acceleration of down a slope of at t = 0. With the origin of the
coordinate system at the front of the lodge, her initial position and velocity are
and
(a) What are the x- and y-components of the skier’s position and velocity as functions of time? (b) What are her
position and velocity at t = 10.0 s?
Access for free at openstax.org