# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 335-343
############################################################

Chapter 7 | Electric Potential 325
Figure 7.37 The electric field between oppositely charged
parallel plates. A portion is released at the positive plate.
Strategy
(a)Sincetheplatesaredescribedas“large”andthedistancebetweenthemisnot,wewillapproximateeachof
them as an infinite plane, and apply the result from Gauss’s law in the previous chapter.
B→ →
(b) Use ΔV AB=−∫ E ·d l .
A
(c)Sincetheelectricfieldisconstant,findtheratioof100Vtothetotalpotentialdifference;thencalculatethis
fraction of the distance.
Solution
a. The electric field is directed from the positive to the negative plate as shown in the figure, and its
magnitude is given by
E= ε σ = 6.81×10 −7 C/m2 =7.69×104 V/m.
0 8.85×10−12 C2/N·m2
b. Tofindthepotentialdifference ΔV betweentheplates,weuseapathfromthenegativetothepositive
→ →
plate that is directed against the field. The displacement vector d l and the electric field E are
→ →
antiparallelso E ·d l =−Edl. Thepotentialdifferencebetweenthepositiveplateandthenegative
plate is then
ΔV =−∫E·dl=E∫dl=El=(7.69×104 V/m)(6.50×10 −3 m)=500V.
c. The total potential difference is 500 V, so 1/5 of the distance between the plates will be the distance
between100-Vpotentialdifferences.Thedistancebetweentheplatesis6.5mm,sotherewillbe1.3mm
between 100-V potential differences.
Significance
Youhavenowseenanumericalcalculationofthelocationsofequipotentialsbetweentwochargedparallelplates.

326 Chapter 7 | Electric Potential
7.12 Check Your UnderstandingWhat are the equipotential surfaces for an infinite line charge?
Distribution of Charges on Conductors
InExample7.19withapointcharge,wefoundthattheequipotentialsurfaceswereintheformofspheres,withthepoint
charge at the center. Given that a conducting sphere in electrostatic equilibrium is a spherical equipotential surface, we
shouldexpectthatwecouldreplaceoneofthesurfacesinExample7.19withaconductingsphereandhaveanidentical
solution outside the sphere. Inside will be rather different, however.
Figure 7.38 An isolated conducting sphere.
Toinvestigatethis,considertheisolatedconductingsphereofFigure7.38thathasaradiusRandanexcesschargeq.To
findtheelectricfieldbothinsideandoutsidethesphere,notethatthesphereisisolated,soitssurfacechangedistribution
andtheelectricfieldofthatdistributionaresphericallysymmetric.Wecanthereforerepresentthefieldas → E =E(r) ^ r.
TocalculateE(r),weapplyGauss’slawoveraclosedsphericalsurfaceSofradiusrthatisconcentricwiththeconducting
sphere. Sinceris constant and ^ n = ^ r on the sphere,
∮ → E · ^ n da=E(r)∮ da=E(r)4πr2.
S
For r < R, S is within the conductor, so recall from our previous study of Gauss’s law that q enc=0 and Gauss’s law
gives E(r)=0, as expected inside a conductor at equilibrium. If r > R, S encloses the conductor so q enc=q. From
Gauss’s law,
q
E(r)4πr2= ε .
0
The electric field of the sphere may therefore be written as
E = 0 (r <R),
E = 1 q ^ r (r ≥R).
4πε
0
r2
Asexpected,intheregion r ≥R, theelectricfieldduetoachargeqplacedonanisolatedconductingsphereofradiusR
is identical to the electric field of a point chargeqlocated at the center of the sphere.
Tofindtheelectricpotentialinsideandoutsidethesphere,notethatfor r ≥R, thepotentialmustbethesameasthatof
an isolated point chargeqlocated at r =0,
q
V(r)=
4π
1
rε r
(r ≥R)
0
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 7 | Electric Potential 327
simply due to the similarity of the electric field.
For r <R, E=0, soV(r) is constant in this region. Since V(R)=q/4πε R,
0
q
V(r)= 1 (r <R).
4πrε R
0
We will use this result to show that
σ R =σ R ,
1 1 2 2
fortwoconductingspheresofradii R andR ,withsurfacechargedensities σ andσ respectively,thatareconnected
1 2 1 2
by a thin wire, as shown in Figure 7.39. The spheres are sufficiently separated so that each can be treated as if it were
isolated (aside from the wire). Note that the connection by the wire means that this entire system must be an equipotential.
Figure 7.39 Two conducting spheres are connected by a thin conducting wire.
We have just seen that the electrical potential at the surface of an isolated, charged conducting sphere of radiusRis
q
V = 1 .
4πrε R
0
Now, the spheres are connected by a conductor and are therefore at the same potential; hence
q q
1 1 = 1 2,
4πrε R 4πrε R
0 1 0 2
and
q q
1 = 2.
R R
1 2
Thenetchargeonaconductingsphereanditssurfacechargedensityarerelatedby q=σ(4πR2). Substitutingthisequation
into the previous one, we find
σ R =σ R .
1 1 2 2
Obviously,twospheresconnectedbyathinwiredonotconstituteatypicalconductorwithavariableradiusofcurvature.
Nevertheless,thisresultdoesatleastprovideaqualitativeideaofhowchargedensityvariesoverthesurfaceofaconductor.
The equation indicates that where the radius of curvature is large (pointsBandDinFigure 7.40), σ andEare small.
Similarly, the charges tend to be denser where the curvature of the surface is greater, as demonstrated by the charge
distributiononoddlyshapedmetal(Figure7.40).Thesurfacechargedensityishigheratlocationswithasmallradiusof
curvature than at locations with a large radius of curvature.

328 Chapter 7 | Electric Potential
Figure 7.40 The surface charge density and the electric field
of a conductor are greater at regions with smaller radii of
curvature.
A practical application of this phenomenon is the lightning rod, which is simply a grounded metal rod with a sharp end
pointing upward. As positive charge accumulates in the ground due to a negatively charged cloud overhead, the electric
fieldaroundthesharppointgetsverylarge.Whenthefieldreachesavalueofapproximately 3.0×10 6 N/C (thedielectric
strength of the air), the free ions in the air are accelerated to such high energies that their collisions with air molecules
actuallyionizethemolecules.TheresultingfreeelectronsintheairthenflowthroughtherodtoEarth,therebyneutralizing
some ofthe positive charge.This keeps the electric field between the cloud andthe groundfromgetting largeenoughto
produce a lightning bolt in the region around the rod.
Animportantapplicationofelectricfieldsandequipotentiallinesinvolvestheheart.Theheartreliesonelectricalsignals
to maintain its rhythm. The movement of electrical signals causes the chambers of the heart to contract and relax. When
a person has a heart attack, the movement of these electrical signals may be disturbed. An artificial pacemaker and a
defibrillator can be used to initiate the rhythm of electrical signals. The equipotential lines around the heart, the thoracic
region,andtheaxisoftheheartareusefulwaysofmonitoringthestructureandfunctionsoftheheart.Anelectrocardiogram
(ECG) measures the small electric signals being generated during the activity of the heart.
Play around with this simulation (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21pointcharsim) to move point charges
around on the playing field and then view the electric field, voltages, equipotential lines, and more.
7.6 | Applications of Electrostatics
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe some of the many practical applications of electrostatics, including several printing
technologies
• Relate these applications to Newton’s second law and the electric force
The study of electrostatics has proven useful in many areas. This module covers just a few of the many applications of
electrostatics.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 7 | Electric Potential 329
The Van de Graaff Generator
VandeGraaffgenerators(orVandeGraaffs)arenotonlyspectacular devices usedtodemonstrate highvoltage dueto
static electricity—they are also used for serious research. The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931 (based on
originalsuggestionsbyLordKelvin)foruseinnuclearphysicsresearch.Figure7.41showsaschematicofalargeresearch
version.VandeGraaffsusebothsmoothandpointedsurfaces,andconductorsandinsulatorstogeneratelargestaticcharges
and, hence, large voltages.
Averylargeexcesschargecanbedepositedonthespherebecauseitmovesquicklytotheoutersurface.Practical limits
arise because the large electric fields polarize and eventually ionize surrounding materials, creating free charges that
neutralize excess charge or allow it to escape. Nevertheless, voltages of 15 million volts are well within practical limits.
Figure 7.41 Schematic of Van de Graaff generator. A battery
(A) supplies excess positive charge to a pointed conductor, the
points of which spray the charge onto a moving insulating belt
near the bottom. The pointed conductor (B) on top in the large
sphere picks up the charge. (The induced electric field at the
points is so large that it removes the charge from the belt.) This
can be done because the charge does not remain inside the
conducting sphere but moves to its outside surface. An ion
source inside the sphere produces positive ions, which are
accelerated away from the positive sphere to high velocities.
Xerography
Mostcopymachinesuseanelectrostaticprocesscalledxerography—awordcoinedfromtheGreekwordsxerosfordry
andgraphosfor writing. The heart of the process is shown in simplified form inFigure 7.42.

330 Chapter 7 | Electric Potential
Figure 7.42 Xerography is a dry copying process based on electrostatics. The major steps in the
process are the charging of the photoconducting drum, transfer of an image, creating a positive charge
duplicate, attraction of toner to the charged parts of the drum, and transfer of toner to the paper. Not
shown are heat treatment of the paper and cleansing of the drum for the next copy.
Aselenium-coatedaluminumdrumissprayedwithpositivechargefrompointsonadevicecalledacorotron.Seleniumis
asubstancewithaninterestingproperty—itisaphotoconductor.Thatis,seleniumisaninsulatorwheninthedarkanda
conductor when exposed to light.
Inthefirststageofthexerographyprocess,theconductingaluminumdrumisgroundedsothatanegativechargeisinduced
underthethinlayerofuniformlypositivelychargedselenium.Inthesecondstage,thesurfaceofthedrumisexposedtothe
imageofwhateveristobecopied.Inlocationswheretheimageislight,theseleniumbecomesconducting,andthepositive
charge is neutralized. In dark areas, the positive charge remains, so the image has been transferred to the drum.
The third stage takes a dry black powder, called toner, and sprays it with a negative charge so that it is attracted to the
positiveregionsofthedrum.Next,ablankpieceofpaperisgivenagreaterpositivechargethanonthedrumsothatitwill
pullthetonerfromthedrum.Finally,thepaperandelectrostaticallyheldtonerarepassedthroughheatedpressurerollers,
which melt and permanently adhere the toner to the fibers of the paper.
Laser Printers
Laserprintersusethexerographicprocesstomakehigh-qualityimagesonpaper,employingalasertoproduceanimageon
thephotoconductingdrumasshowninFigure7.43.Initsmostcommonapplication,thelaserprinterreceivesoutputfrom
acomputer,anditcanachievehigh-qualityoutputbecauseoftheprecisionwithwhichlaserlightcanbecontrolled.Many
laserprintersdosignificantinformationprocessing,suchasmakingsophisticatedlettersorfonts,andinthepastmayhave
contained a computer more powerful than the one giving them the raw data to be printed.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 7 | Electric Potential 331
Figure 7.43 In a laser printer, a laser beam is scanned across a photoconducting drum,
leaving a positively charged image. The other steps for charging the drum and
transferring the image to paper are the same as in xerography. Laser light can be very
precisely controlled, enabling laser printers to produce high-quality images.
Ink Jet Printers and Electrostatic Painting
Theinkjetprinter,commonlyusedtoprintcomputer-generatedtextandgraphics,alsoemployselectrostatics.Anozzle
makes a fine spray of tiny ink droplets, which are then given an electrostatic charge (Figure 7.44).
Oncecharged,thedropletscanbedirected,usingpairsofchargedplates,withgreatprecisiontoformlettersandimageson
paper.Inkjetprinterscanproducecolorimagesbyusingablackjetandthreeotherjetswithprimarycolors,usuallycyan,
magenta,andyellow,muchasacolortelevisionproducescolor.(Thisismoredifficultwithxerography,requiringmultiple
drums and toners.)
Figure 7.44 The nozzle of an ink-jet printer produces small ink
droplets, which are sprayed with electrostatic charge. Various computer-
driven devices are then used to direct the droplets to the correct positions
on a page.
Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge to spray paint onto oddly shaped surfaces. Mutual repulsion of like
charges causes the paint to fly away from its source. Surface tension forms drops, which are then attracted by unlike
charges to the surface to be painted. Electrostatic painting can reach hard-to-get-to places, applying an even coat in a
controlledmanner.Iftheobjectisaconductor,theelectricfieldisperpendiculartothesurface,tendingtobringthedrops
in perpendicularly. Corners and points on conductors will receive extra paint. Felt can similarly be applied.
Smoke Precipitators and Electrostatic Air Cleaning
Anotherimportant application ofelectrostatics isfoundinaircleaners, bothlargeandsmall. Theelectrostatic partofthe
processplacesexcess(usuallypositive)chargeonsmoke,dust,pollen,andotherparticlesintheairandthenpassestheair
through an oppositely charged grid that attracts and retains the charged particles (Figure 7.45)
Large electrostatic precipitators are used industrially to remove over 99% of the particles from stack gas emissions

332 Chapter 7 | Electric Potential
associated with the burning of coal and oil. Home precipitators, often in conjunction with the home heating and air
conditioning system, are very effective in removing polluting particles, irritants, and allergens.
Figure 7.45 (a) Schematic of an electrostatic precipitator. Air is passed through grids of opposite charge. The first grid charges
airborne particles, while the second attracts and collects them. (b) The dramatic effect of electrostatic precipitators is seen by the
absence of smoke from this power plant. (credit b: modification of work by “Cmdalgleish”/Wikimedia Commons)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9