# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 509-516
############################################################

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 499
Figure 11.5 The magnetic forces on an alpha-particle moving in a uniform
magnetic field. The field is the same in each drawing, but the velocity is different.
Strategy
Wearegiventhecharge,itsvelocity,andthemagneticfieldstrengthanddirection.Wecanthususetheequation
→ F =q → v × → B or F =qvBsinθ tocalculatetheforce.ThedirectionoftheforceisdeterminedbyRHR-1.
Solution
a. First,todeterminethedirection,startwithyourfingerspointinginthepositivex-direction.Sweepyour
fingers upward in the direction of magnetic field. Your thumb should point in the negative y-direction.
Thisshouldmatchthemathematicalanswer.Tocalculatetheforce,weusethegivencharge,velocity,and
magnetic field and the definition of the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate:
→ F =q → v × → B = ⎛ 3.2×10 −19 C ⎞ ⎛ 5.0×104m/s ^ i ⎞ × ⎛ 1.5T ^ k ⎞ =−2.4×10−14N ^ j.
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
b. First,todetermine thedirectionality,startwithyourfingerspointinginthenegativey-direction.Sweep
yourfingersupwardinthedirectionofmagneticfieldasinthepreviousproblem.Yourthumbshouldbe
openinthenegativex-direction.Thisshouldmatchthemathematicalanswer.Tocalculatetheforce,we
usethegivencharge,velocity,andmagneticfieldandthedefinitionofthemagneticforceincross-product
form to calculate:
→ F =q → v × → B = ⎛ 3.2×10 −19 C ⎞ ⎛ −5.0×104m/s ^ j ⎞ × ⎛ 1.5T ^ k ⎞ =−2.4×10−14N ^ i.
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
AnalternativeapproachistouseEquation11.2tofindthemagnitudeoftheforce.Thisappliesforboth

500 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
parts(a)and(b).Sincethevelocityisperpendiculartothemagneticfield,theanglebetweenthemis90
degrees. Therefore, the magnitude of the force is:
F =qvBsinθ= ⎛ 3.2×10 −19 C ⎞⎛ 5.0×104m/s ⎞ (1.5T)sin(90°)=2.4×10−14N.
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠
c. Sincethevelocityandmagneticfieldareparalleltoeachother,thereisnoorientationofyourhandthat
willresultinaforcedirection.Therefore,theforceonthismovingchargeiszero.Thisisconfirmedby
the cross product. When you cross two vectors pointing in the same direction, the result is equal to zero.
d. First, to determine the direction, your fingers could point in any orientation; however, you must sweep
yourfingersupwardinthedirectionofthemagneticfield.Asyourotateyourhand,noticethatthethumb
canpointinanyx-ory-directionpossible,butnotinthez-direction.Thisshouldmatchthemathematical
answer.Tocalculatetheforce,weusethegivencharge,velocity,andmagneticfieldandthedefinitionof
the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate:
→ F =q → v × → B = ⎛ 3.2×10 −19 C ⎞ ⎛⎛ 2.0 ^ i −3.0 ^ j +1.0 ^ k ⎞ ×104m/s ⎞ × ⎛ 1.5T ^ k ⎞
⎝ ⎠⎝⎝ ⎠ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
⎛ ^ ^⎞
−15
= −14.4i −9.6j ×10 N.
⎝ ⎠
This solution can be rewritten in terms of a magnitude and angle in thexy-plane:
→
| F | = F x 2+F y 2= (−14.4)2+(−9.6)2×10 −15 N=1.7×10−14N
θ = tan−1
⎛F y⎞
=tan−1
⎛
−9.6×10
−15
N
⎞
=34°.
⎝F x ⎠ ⎝ −14.4×10 −15 N ⎠
ThemagnitudeoftheforcecanalsobecalculatedusingEquation 11.2.Thevelocityinthisquestion,
however,hasthreecomponents.Thez-componentofthevelocitycanbeneglected,becauseitisparallel
tothemagneticfieldandthereforegeneratesnoforce.Themagnitudeofthevelocityiscalculatedfrom
the x- and y-components. The angle between the velocity in the xy-plane and the magnetic field in the
z-plane is 90 degrees. Therefore, the force is calculated to be:
| → v | = (2)2+(−3)2×104m =3.6×104m
s s
F = qvBsinθ=(3.2×10 −19 C)(3.6×104m/s)(1.5T)sin(90°)=1.7×10−14N.
This is the same magnitude of force calculated by unit vectors.
Significance
The cross product in this formula results in a third vector that must be perpendicular to the other two. Other
physicalquantities,suchasangularmomentum,alsohavethreevectorsthatarerelatedbythecrossproduct.Note
thattypicalforcevaluesinmagneticforceproblemsaremuchlargerthanthegravitationalforce.Therefore,for
an isolated charge, the magnetic force is the dominant force governing the charge’s motion.
11.1 Check Your Understanding Repeat the previous problem with the magnetic field in the x-direction
rather than in thez-direction. Check your answers with RHR-1.
Representing Magnetic Fields
Therepresentationofmagneticfieldsbymagneticfieldlinesisveryusefulinvisualizingthestrengthanddirectionofthe
magneticfield.AsshowninFigure11.6,eachoftheselinesformsaclosedloop,evenifnotshownbytheconstraintsof
the space available for the figure. The field lines emerge from the north pole (N), loop around to the south pole (S), and
continue through the bar magnet back to the north pole.
Magnetic field lines have several hard-and-fast rules:
1. Thedirectionofthemagneticfieldistangenttothefieldlineatanypointinspace.Asmallcompasswillpointin
the direction of the field line.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 501
2. Thestrengthofthefieldisproportionaltotheclosenessofthelines.Itisexactlyproportionaltothenumberoflines
per unit area perpendicular to the lines (called the areal density).
3. Magnetic field lines can never cross, meaning that the field is unique at any point in space.
4. Magneticfieldlinesarecontinuous,formingclosedloopswithoutabeginningorend.Theyaredirectedfromthe
north pole to the south pole.
The last property is related to the fact that the north and south poles cannot be separated. It is a distinct difference from
electricfieldlines,whichgenerallybeginonpositivechargesandendonnegativechargesoratinfinity.Ifisolatedmagnetic
charges (referred to asmagnetic monopoles) existed, then magnetic field lines would begin and end on them.
Figure 11.6 Magnetic field lines are defined to have the direction in which a small compass points when placed at a
location in the field. The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness (or density) of the lines. If the interior of the
magnet could be probed, the field lines would be found to form continuous, closed loops. To fit in a reasonable space, some
of these drawings may not show the closing of the loops; however, if enough space were provided, the loops would be closed.
11.3 | Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how a charged particle in an external magnetic field undergoes circular motion
• Describe how to determine the radius of the circular motion of a charged particle in a magnetic
field
Achargedparticleexperiencesaforcewhenmovingthroughamagneticfield.Whathappensifthisfieldisuniformover
themotionofthechargedparticle?Whatpathdoestheparticlefollow?Inthissection,wediscussthecircularmotionofthe
charged particle as well as other motion that results from a charged particle entering a magnetic field.
ThesimplestcaseoccurswhenachargedparticlemovesperpendiculartoauniformB-field(Figure 11.7).Ifthefieldis
inavacuum,themagneticfieldisthedominantfactordeterminingthemotion.Sincethemagneticforceisperpendicular
tothedirectionoftravel,achargedparticlefollowsacurvedpathinamagneticfield.Theparticlecontinuestofollowthis
curvedpathuntilitformsacompletecircle.Anotherwaytolookatthisisthatthemagneticforceisalwaysperpendicular
tovelocity,sothatitdoesnoworkonthechargedparticle. Theparticle’skinetic energyandspeedthusremainconstant.
The direction of motion is affected but not the speed.

502 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
Figure 11.7 A negatively charged particle moves in the plane of the paper in a
region where the magnetic field is perpendicular to the paper (represented by the
small × ’s—like the tails of arrows). The magnetic force is perpendicular to the
velocity, so velocity changes in direction but not magnitude. The result is
uniform circular motion. (Note that because the charge is negative, the force is
opposite in direction to the prediction of the right-hand rule.)
mv2
Inthissituation,themagneticforcesuppliesthecentripetalforce F c= r . Notingthatthevelocityisperpendicularto
themagneticfield,themagnitudeofthemagneticforceisreducedto F =qvB. BecausethemagneticforceFsuppliesthe
centripetal force F c, we have
mv2 (11.4)
qvB= r .
Solving forryields
r = mv . (11.5)
qB
Here,ristheradiusofcurvatureofthepathofachargedparticle withmassmandchargeq,movingataspeedvthatis
perpendiculartoamagneticfieldofstrengthB.Thetimeforthechargedparticletogoaroundthecircularpathisdefinedas
theperiod,whichisthesameasthedistancetraveled(thecircumference)dividedbythespeed.BasedonthisandEquation
11.4, we can derive the period of motion as
T = 2π v r = 2 v π m qB v = 2 q π B m . (11.6)
Ifthevelocityisnotperpendiculartothemagneticfield,thenwecancompareeachcomponentofthevelocityseparately
with the magnetic field. The component of the velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field produces a magnetic force
perpendicular to both this velocity and the field:
v perp=vsinθ, v para=vcosθ. (11.7)
where θ is the angle between v and B. The component parallel to the magnetic field creates constant motion along the
samedirectionasthemagneticfield,alsoshowninEquation11.7.Theparallelmotiondeterminesthepitchpofthehelix,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 503
which is the distance between adjacent turns. This distance equals the parallel component of the velocity times the period:
p=v
para
T. (11.8)
The result is ahelical motion, as shown in the following figure.
Figure 11.8 A charged particle moving with a velocity not in
the same direction as the magnetic field. The velocity
component perpendicular to the magnetic field creates circular
motion, whereas the component of the velocity parallel to the
field moves the particle along a straight line. The pitch is the
horizontal distance between two consecutive circles. The
resulting motion is helical.
While the charged particle travels in a helical path, it may enter a region where the magnetic field is not uniform. In
particular,supposeaparticletravelsfromaregionofstrongmagneticfieldtoaregionofweakerfield,thenbacktoaregion
ofstrongerfield.Theparticlemayreflectbackbeforeenteringthestrongermagneticfieldregion.Thisissimilartoawave
onastringtravelingfromaverylight,thinstringtoahardwallandreflectingbackward.Ifthereflectionhappensatboth
ends, the particle is trapped in a so-called magnetic bottle.
Trapped particles in magnetic fields are found in the Van Allen radiation belts around Earth, which are part of Earth’s
magneticfield.ThesebeltswerediscoveredbyJamesVanAllenwhiletryingtomeasurethefluxofcosmicraysonEarth
(high-energy particles that come from outside the solar system) to see whether this was similar to the flux measured on
Earth.VanAllenfoundthatduetothecontributionofparticlestrappedinEarth’smagneticfield,thefluxwasmuchhigher
onEarththaninouterspace.Aurorae,likethefamousauroraborealis(northernlights)intheNorthernHemisphere(Figure
11.9),arebeautifuldisplaysoflightemittedasionsrecombinewithelectronsenteringtheatmosphereastheyspiralalong
magneticfieldlines.(Theionsareprimarilyoxygenandnitrogenatomsthatareinitiallyionizedbycollisionswithenergetic
particles in Earth’s atmosphere.) Aurorae have also been observed on other planets, such as Jupiter and Saturn.

504 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
Figure 11.9 (a) The Van Allen radiation belts around Earth trap ions produced by cosmic rays striking Earth’s atmosphere. (b)
The magnificent spectacle of the aurora borealis, or northern lights, glows in the northern sky above Bear Lake near Eielson Air
Force Base, Alaska. Shaped by Earth’s magnetic field, this light is produced by glowing molecules and ions of oxygen and
nitrogen. (credit b: modification of work by USAF Senior Airman Joshua Strang)
Example 11.2
Beam Deflector
Aresearchgroupisinvestigatingshort-livedradioactiveisotopes.Theyneedtodesignawaytotransportalpha-
particles (helium nuclei) from where they are made to a place where they will collide with another material
to form an isotope. The beam of alpha-particles ⎛m=6.64×10 −27 kg,q=3.2×10 −19 C ⎞ bends through a
⎝ ⎠
90-degree region with a uniform magnetic field of 0.050 T (Figure 11.10). (a) In what direction should the
magneticfieldbeapplied?(b)Howmuchtimedoesittakethealpha-particlestotraversetheuniformmagnetic
field region?
Figure 11.10 Top view of the beam deflector setup.
Strategy
a. ThedirectionofthemagneticfieldisshownbytheRHR-1.Yourfingerspointinthedirectionofv,and
yourthumbneedstopointinthedirectionoftheforce,totheleft.Therefore,sincethealpha-particlesare
positively charged, the magnetic field must point down.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 505
b. The period of the alpha-particle going around the circle is
T =
2πm
.
(11.9)
qB
Becausetheparticleisonlygoingaroundaquarterofacircle,wecantake0.25timestheperiodtofind
the time it takes to go around this path.
Solution
a. Let’sstartbyfocusingonthealpha-particleenteringthefieldnearthebottomofthepicture.First,point
yourthumbupthepage.Inorderforyourpalmtoopentotheleftwherethecentripetalforce(andhence
themagneticforce)points,yourfingersneedtochangeorientationuntiltheypointintothepage.Thisis
the direction of the applied magnetic field.
b. Theperiodofthechargedparticlegoingaroundacircleiscalculatedbyusingthegivenmass,charge,and
magnetic field in the problem. This works out to be
T = 2πm =
2π⎛
⎝ 6.64×10
−27
kg
⎞
⎠ =2.6×10 −6 s.
qB ⎛ −19 ⎞
3.2×10 C(0.050T)
⎝ ⎠
However,forthegivenproblem,thealpha-particlegoesaroundaquarterofthecircle,sothetimeittakes
would be
t=0.25×2.61×10 −6 s=6.5×10 −7 s.
Significance
Thistimemaybequickenoughtogettothematerialwewouldliketobombard,dependingonhowshort-lived
theradioactiveisotopeisandcontinuestoemitalpha-particles.Ifwecouldincreasethemagneticfieldappliedin
theregion,thiswouldshortenthetimeevenmore.Thepaththeparticlesneedtotakecouldbeshortened,butthis
may not be economical given the experimental setup.
11.2 CheckYourUnderstandingAuniformmagneticfieldofmagnitude1.5Tisdirectedhorizontallyfrom
westtoeast.(a)Whatisthemagneticforceonaprotonattheinstantwhenitismovingverticallydownwardin
the field with a speed of 4×10 7 m/s? (b) Compare this force with the weightwof a proton.
Example 11.3
Helical Motion in a Magnetic Field
Aprotonentersauniformmagneticfieldof 1.0×10−4T withaspeedof 5×10 5 m/s. Atwhatanglemustthe
magneticfieldbefromthevelocitysothatthepitchoftheresultinghelicalmotionisequaltotheradiusofthe
helix?
Strategy
Thepitchofthemotionrelatestotheparallelvelocitytimestheperiodofthecircularmotion,whereastheradius
relatestotheperpendicularvelocitycomponent.Aftersettingtheradiusandthepitchequaltoeachother,solve
for the angle between the magnetic field and velocity or θ.
Solution
ThepitchisgivenbyEquation11.8,theperiodisgivenbyEquation11.6,andtheradiusofcircularmotion
is given by Equation 11.5. Note that the velocity in the radius equation is related to only the perpendicular
velocity,whichiswherethecircularmotionoccurs.Therefore,wesubstitutethesinecomponentoftheoverall