# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 570-576
############################################################

560 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
and
µ NI (12.33)
B= 0 (within the toroid).
2πr
Themagneticfieldisdirectedinthecounterclockwisedirectionforthewindingsshown.Whenthecurrentinthecoilsis
reversed, the direction of the magnetic field also reverses.
The magnetic field inside a toroid is not uniform, as it varies inversely with the distance r from the axis OO’. However,
if the central radius R (the radius midway between the inner and outer radii of the toroid) is much larger than the cross-
sectionaldiameterofthecoilsr,thevariationisfairlysmall,andthemagnitudeofthemagneticfieldmaybecalculatedby
Equation 12.33where r =R.
12.7 | Magnetism in Matter
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Classify magnetic materials as paramagnetic, diamagnetic, or ferromagnetic, based on their
response to a magnetic field
• Sketch how magnetic dipoles align with the magnetic field in each type of substance
• Define hysteresis and magnetic susceptibility, which determines the type of magnetic material
Whyarecertainmaterialsmagneticandothersnot?Andwhydocertainsubstancesbecomemagnetizedbyafield,whereas
others are unaffected? To answer such questions, we need an understanding of magnetism on a microscopic level.
Withinanatom,everyelectrontravelsinanorbitandspinsonaninternalaxis.Bothtypesofmotionproducecurrentloops
andthereforemagneticdipoles.Foraparticularatom,thenetmagneticdipolemomentisthevectorsumofthemagnetic
dipolemoments.Valuesof µ forseveraltypesofatomsaregiveninTable12.1.Noticethatsomeatomshaveazeronet
dipole moment and that the magnitudes of the nonvanishing moments are typically 10 −23 A·m2.
Atom Magnetic Moment ⎛ ⎝10 −24 A·m 2⎞ ⎠
H 9.27
He 0
Li 9.27
O 13.9
Na 9.27
S 13.9
Table 12.1Magnetic Moments of Some Atoms
Ahandfulofmatterhasapproximately 10 26 atomsandions,eachwithitsmagneticdipolemoment.Ifnoexternalmagnetic
fieldispresent,themagneticdipolesarerandomlyoriented—asmanyarepointedupasdown,asmanyarepointedeastas
west,andsoon.Consequently,thenetmagneticdipolemomentofthesampleiszero.However,ifthesampleisplacedin
amagneticfield,thesedipolestendtoalignwiththefield(seeEquation 12.14),andthisalignmentdetermineshowthe
samplerespondstothefield.Onthebasisofthisresponse,amaterialissaidtobeeitherparamagnetic,ferromagnetic,or
diamagnetic.
Inaparamagneticmaterial,onlyasmallfraction(roughlyone-third)ofthemagneticdipolesarealignedwiththeapplied
field.Sinceeachdipoleproducesitsownmagneticfield,thisalignmentcontributesanextramagneticfield,whichenhances
theappliedfield.Whenaferromagneticmaterialisplacedinamagneticfield,itsmagneticdipolesalsobecomealigned;
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 561
furthermore,theybecomelockedtogethersothatapermanentmagnetization results,evenwhenthefieldisturnedoffor
reversed.Thispermanentmagnetizationhappensinferromagneticmaterialsbutnotparamagneticmaterials.Diamagnetic
materials are composed of atoms that have no net magnetic dipole moment. However, when a diamagnetic material is
placed in a magnetic field, a magnetic dipole moment is directed opposite to the applied field and therefore produces a
magnetic field that opposes the applied field. We now consider each type of material in greater detail.
Paramagnetic Materials
Forsimplicity,weassumeoursampleisalong,cylindricalpiecethatcompletelyfillstheinteriorofalong,tightlywound
solenoid.Whenthereisnocurrentinthesolenoid,themagneticdipolesinthesamplearerandomlyorientedandproduce
no net magnetic field. With a solenoid current, the magnetic field due to the solenoid exerts a torque on the dipoles that
tends to align them with the field. In competition with the aligning torque are thermal collisions that tend to randomize
theorientationsofthedipoles.Therelativeimportanceofthesetwocompetingprocessescanbeestimatedbycomparing
theenergiesinvolved.FromEquation12.14,theenergydifferencebetweenamagneticdipolealignedwithandagainsta
magnetic field is U B=2µB. If µ =9.3×10−24A·m2 (the value of atomic hydrogen) andB= 1.0 T, then
U B=1.9×10 −23 J.
At a room temperature of 27°C, the thermal energy per atom is
U T ≈kT =(1.38×10 −23 J/K)(300K)=4.1×10−21J,
whichisabout220timesgreaterthan U B. Clearly,energyexchangesinthermalcollisionscanseriouslyinterferewiththe
alignment of the magnetic dipoles. As a result, only a small fraction of the dipoles is aligned at any instant.
The four sketches of Figure 12.23 furnish a simple model of this alignment process. In part (a), before the field of the
solenoid(notshown)containingtheparamagneticsampleisapplied,themagneticdipolesarerandomlyorientedandthere
is no net magnetic dipole moment associated with the material. With the introduction of the field, a partial alignment of
thedipolestakesplace,asdepictedinpart(b).Thecomponentofthenetmagneticdipolemomentthatisperpendicularto
thefieldvanishes.Wemaythenrepresentthesamplebypart(c),whichshowsacollectionofmagneticdipolescompletely
aligned with the field. By treating these dipoles as current loops, we can picture the dipole alignment as equivalent to a
current around the surface of the material, as in part (d). This fictitious surface current produces its own magnetic field,
which enhances the field of the solenoid.
Figure 12.23 The alignment process in a paramagnetic material filling a solenoid (not shown). (a) Without
an applied field, the magnetic dipoles are randomly oriented. (b) With a field, partial alignment occurs. (c) An
equivalent representation of part (b). (d) The internal currents cancel, leaving an effective surface current that
produces a magnetic field similar to that of a finite solenoid.

562 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
→
We can express the total magnetic field B in the material as
→ → → (12.34)
B = B
0
+ B m,
→ →
where B 0 isthefieldduetothecurrent I 0 inthesolenoidand B m isthefieldduetothesurfacecurrent I m around
→ →
the sample. Now B m is usually proportional to B 0 , a fact we express by
→ → (12.35)
B m= χ B
0
,
where χ isadimensionlessquantitycalledthemagneticsusceptibility.Valuesof χ forsomeparamagneticmaterialsare
giveninTable12.2.Sincethealignmentofmagneticdipolesissoweak, χ isverysmallforparamagneticmaterials.By
combiningEquation 12.34andEquation 12.35, we obtain:
→ → → → (12.36)
B = B + χ B =(1+ χ) B .
0 0 0
For a sample within an infinite solenoid, this becomes
B=(1+ χ)µ nI. (12.37)
0
This expression tells us that the insertion of a paramagnetic material into a solenoid increases the field by a factor of
(1+ χ). However, since χ is so small, the field isn’t enhanced very much.
The quantity
µ =(1+ χ)µ . (12.38)
0
is called the magnetic permeability of a material. In terms of µ, Equation 12.37can be written as
B= µnI (12.39)
for the filled solenoid.
Paramagnetic Materials χ Diamagnetic Materials χ
Aluminum −5 Bismuth −5
2.2×10 −1.7×10
Calcium −5 Carbon (diamond) −5
1.4×10 −2.2×10
Chromium 3.1×10−4 Copper
−9.7×10
−6
Magnesium −5 Lead −5
1.2×10 −1.8×10
Oxygen gas (1 atm) −6 Mercury −5
1.8×10 −2.8×10
Oxygen liquid (90 K) −3 Hydrogen gas (1 atm) −9
3.5×10 −2.2×10
Tungsten −5 Nitrogen gas (1 atm) −9
6.8×10 −6.7×10
Table 12.2Magnetic Susceptibilities *Note: Unless otherwise specified, values given are for
room temperature.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 563
Paramagnetic Materials χ Diamagnetic Materials χ
Air (1 atm) 3.6×10 −7 Water −9.1×10 −6
Table 12.2Magnetic Susceptibilities *Note: Unless otherwise specified, values given are for
room temperature.
Diamagnetic Materials
Amagneticfieldalwaysinducesamagneticdipoleinanatom.Thisinduceddipolepointsoppositetotheappliedfield,so
itsmagnetic field isalsodirected opposite totheapplied field. Inparamagnetic andferromagnetic materials, theinduced
magneticdipoleismaskedbymuchstrongerpermanentmagneticdipolesoftheatoms.However,indiamagneticmaterials,
whose atoms have no permanent magnetic dipole moments, the effect of the induced dipole is observable.
We can now describe the magnetic effects of diamagnetic materials with the same model developed for paramagnetic
materials. In this case, however, the fictitious surface current flows opposite to the solenoid current, and the magnetic
susceptibility χ is negative. Values of χ for some diamagnetic materials are also given inTable 12.2.
Water is a common diamagnetic material. Animals are mostly composed of water. Experiments have been
performedonfrogs (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21frogs) andmice (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/
21mice) indivergingmagneticfields.Thewatermoleculesarerepelledfromtheappliedmagneticfieldagainst
gravity until the animal reaches an equilibrium. The result is that the animal is levitated by the magnetic field.
Ferromagnetic Materials
Common magnets are made of a ferromagnetic material such as iron or one of its alloys. Experiments reveal that a
ferromagneticmaterialconsistsoftinyregionsknownasmagneticdomains.Theirvolumestypicallyrangefrom 10−12
to 10 −8 m 3 , andtheycontainabout 10 17 to 1021 atoms.Withinadomain,themagneticdipolesarerigidlyalignedin
thesamedirectionbycouplingamongtheatoms.Thiscoupling,whichisduetoquantummechanicaleffects,issostrong
thateventhermalagitation atroomtemperature cannotbreakit.Theresultisthateachdomainhasanetdipolemoment.
Some materials have weaker coupling and are ferromagnetic only at lower temperatures.
Ifthedomainsinaferromagneticsamplearerandomlyoriented,asshowninFigure12.24,thesamplehasnonetmagnetic
dipole moment and is said to be unmagnetized. Suppose that we fill the volume of a solenoid with an unmagnetized
→
ferromagnetic sample. When the magnetic field B of the solenoid is turned on, the dipole moments of the domains
0
rotate so that they align somewhat with the field, as depicted in Figure 12.24. In addition, the aligned domains tend to
increase in size at the expense of unaligned ones. The net effect of these two processes is the creation of a net magnetic
dipole moment for the ferromagnet that is directed along the applied magnetic field. This net magnetic dipole moment
is much larger than that of a paramagnetic sample, and the domains, with their large numbers of atoms, do not become
misaligned by thermal agitation. Consequently, the field due to the alignment of the domains is quite large.

564 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
Figure 12.24 (a) Domains are randomly oriented in an unmagnetized ferromagnetic sample such as iron. The arrows represent
the orientations of the magnetic dipoles within the domains. (b) In an applied magnetic field, the domains align somewhat with
the field. (c) The domains of a single crystal of nickel. The white lines show the boundaries of the domains. These lines are
produced by iron oxide powder sprinkled on the crystal.
Besides iron, only four elements contain the magnetic domains needed to exhibit ferromagnetic behavior: cobalt, nickel,
gadolinium, and dysprosium. Many alloys of these elements are also ferromagnetic. Ferromagnetic materials can be
described using Equation 12.34 through Equation 12.39, the paramagnetic equations. However, the value of χ for
ferromagnetic material is usually on the order of 10 3 to 104, and it also depends on the history of the magnetic
field to which the material has been subject. A typical plot of B (the total field in the material) versus B (the applied
0
field) for an initially unmagnetized piece of iron is shown in Figure 12.25. Some sample numbers are (1) for
⎛ ⎞
B =1.0×10−4T, B=0.60T, and χ = 0.60 −1≈6.0×10 3; (2) for B =6.0×10−4T, B=1.5T,
0 ⎝ 1.0×10−4⎠ 0
⎛ ⎞
and χ = 1.5 −1≈2.5×10 3 .
⎝ 6.0×10−4⎠
Figure 12.25 (a) The magnetic fieldBin annealed iron as a
function of the applied field B .
0
When B isvariedoverarangeofpositiveandnegativevalues,BisfoundtobehaveasshowninFigure 12.26.Note
0
that the same B (corresponding to the same current in the solenoid) can produce different values of B in the material.
0
ThemagneticfieldBproducedinaferromagneticmaterialbyanappliedfield B dependsonthemagnetichistoryofthe
0
material.Thiseffectiscalledhysteresis,andthecurveofFigure12.26iscalledahysteresisloop.NoticethatBdoesnot
disappearwhen B =0 (i.e.,whenthecurrentinthesolenoidisturnedoff).Theironstaysmagnetized,whichmeansthat
0
it has become a permanent magnet.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 565
Figure 12.26 A typical hysteresis loop for a ferromagnet.
When the material is first magnetized, it follows a curve from 0
toa. When B is reversed, it takes the path shown fromatob.
0
If B is reversed again, the material follows the curve frombto
0
a.
Liketheparamagnetic sample ofFigure 12.23,thepartial alignment ofthedomainsinaferromagnet isequivalent toa
currentflowingaroundthesurface.Abarmagnetcanthereforebepicturedasatightlywoundsolenoidwithalargecurrent
circulatingthroughitscoils(thesurfacecurrent).YoucanseeinFigure 12.27thatthismodelfitsquitewell.Thefields
ofthebarmagnetandthefinitesolenoidarestrikinglysimilar.Thefigurealsoshowshowthepolesofthebarmagnetare
identified. To form closed loops, the field lines outside the magnet leave the north (N) pole and enter the south (S) pole,
whereas inside the magnet, they leave S and enter N.
Figure 12.27 Comparison of the magnetic fields of a finite solenoid and a bar magnet.
Ferromagnetic materials are found in computer hard disk drives and permanent data storage devices (Figure 12.28). A
materialusedinyourharddiskdrivesiscalledaspinvalve,whichhasalternatinglayersofferromagnetic(aligningwith
theexternalmagneticfield)andantiferromagnetic(eachatomisalignedoppositetothenext)metals.Itwasobservedthat