# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 26-32
############################################################

18 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Entering known values,
n =1.00 sin30.0° = 0.500 =1.33.
2 sin22.0° 0.375
Significance
This is the index of refraction for water, and Snell could have determined it by measuring the angles and
performingthiscalculation.Hewouldthenhavefound1.33tobetheappropriateindexofrefractionforwaterin
allothersituations,suchaswhenaraypassesfromwatertoglass.Today,wecanverifythattheindexofrefraction
is related to the speed of light in a medium by measuring that speed directly.
Explorebendingoflight(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21bendoflight)betweentwomediawithdifferent
indices of refraction. Use the “Intro” simulation and see how changing from air to water to glass changes the
bending angle. Use the protractor tool to measure the angles and see if you can recreate the configuration in
Example 1.2. Also by measurement, confirm that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
Example 1.3
A Larger Change in Direction
SupposethatinasituationlikethatinExample1.2,lightgoesfromairtodiamondandthattheincidentangle
is 30.0°. Calculate the angle of refraction θ in the diamond.
2
Strategy
Again,theindexofrefractionforairistakentobe n =1.00,andwearegiven θ =30.0°.Wecanlookup
1 1
theindexofrefractionfordiamondinTable1.1,finding n =2.419.TheonlyunknowninSnell’slawis θ ,
2 2
which we wish to determine.
Solution
Solving Snell’s law for sinθ yields
2
n
sinθ 2 = n 1sinθ 1 .
2
Entering known values,
sinθ = 1.00 sin30.0°=(0.413)(0.500)=0.207.
2 2.419
The angle is thus
θ =sin−1(0.207)=11.9°.
2
Significance
Forthesame 30.0° angleofincidence,theangleofrefractionindiamondissignificantlysmallerthaninwater
(11.9° ratherthan 22.0°—seeExample1.2).Thismeansthereisalargerchangeindirectionindiamond.The
causeofalargechangeindirectionisalargechangeintheindexofrefraction(orspeed).Ingeneral,thelarger
the change in speed, the greater the effect on the direction of the ray.
1.2 Check Your Understanding In Table 1.1, the solid with the next highest index of refraction after
diamondiszircon.IfthediamondinExample 1.3werereplacedwithapieceofzircon,whatwouldbethe
new angle of refraction?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 19
1.4 | Total Internal Reflection
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the phenomenon of total internal reflection
• Describe the workings and uses of optical fibers
• Analyze the reason for the sparkle of diamonds
Agood-quality mirrormayreflect morethan 90% ofthelight that falls onit,absorbingtherest.Butitwouldbeuseful
tohaveamirrorthatreflectsallofthelightthatfallsonit.Interestingly,wecanproducetotalreflectionusinganaspectof
refraction.
Consider what happens when a ray of light strikes the surface between two materials, as shown in Figure 1.14(a). Part
of the light crosses the boundary and is refracted; the rest is reflected. If, as shown in the figure, the index of refraction
for the second medium is less than for the first, the ray bends away from the perpendicular. (Since n >n , the angle
1 2
of refraction is greater than the angle of incidence—that is, θ >θ .) Now imagine what happens as the incident angle
2 1
increases.Thiscauses θ toincreasealso.Thelargesttheangleofrefraction θ canbeis 90°,asshowninpart(b).The
2 2
criticalangle θ foracombinationofmaterialsisdefinedtobetheincidentangle θ thatproducesanangleofrefraction
c 1
of 90°.Thatis, θ
c
istheincidentangleforwhich θ
2
=90°.Iftheincidentangle θ
1
isgreaterthanthecriticalangle,as
showninFigure1.14(c),thenallofthelightisreflectedbackintomedium1,aconditioncalledtotalinternalreflection.
(As the figure shows, the reflected rays obey the law of reflection so that the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of
incidence in all three cases.)
Figure 1.14 (a) A ray of light crosses a boundary where the index of refraction decreases. That is, n <n . The ray bends
2 1
away from the perpendicular. (b) The critical angle θ c is the angle of incidence for which the angle of refraction is 90°. (c)
Total internal reflection occurs when the incident angle is greater than the critical angle.
Snell’s law states the relationship between angles and indices of refraction. It is given by
n sinθ =n sinθ .
1 1 2 2
When the incident angle equals the critical angle ⎛ ⎝ θ 1 =θ c ⎞ ⎠ , the angle of refraction is 90° ⎛ ⎝ θ 2 =90°⎞ ⎠ . Noting that
sin90°=1, Snell’s law in this case becomes
n sinθ =n .
1 1 2
The critical angle θ for a given combination of materials is thus
c

20 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
θ
c=sin−1⎛
⎝
n
n
2⎞
⎠ forn 1 >n 2 .
(1.5)
1
Total internal reflection occurs for any incident angle greater than the critical angle θ , and it can only occur when the
c
secondmediumhasanindexofrefractionlessthanthefirst.Notethatthisequationiswrittenforalightraythattravelsin
medium 1 and reflects from medium 2, as shown inFigure 1.14.
Example 1.4
Determining a Critical Angle
Whatisthecriticalangleforlighttravelinginapolystyrene(atypeofplastic)pipesurroundedbyair?Theindex
of refraction for polystyrene is 1.49.
Strategy
Theindexofrefractionofaircanbetakentobe1.00,asbefore.Thus,theconditionthatthesecondmedium(air)
has an index of refraction less than the first (plastic) is satisfied, and we can use the equation
θ
c=sin−1⎛
⎝
n
n
2⎞
⎠
1
to find the critical angle θ c, where n
2
=1.00 and n
1
=1.49.
Solution
Substituting the identified values gives
θ c=sin−1⎛
⎝
1
1
.
.
0
4
0
9
⎞
⎠
=sin−1(0.671)=42.2°.
Significance
Thisresultmeansthatanyrayoflightinsidetheplasticthatstrikesthesurfaceatananglegreaterthan 42.2° is
totallyreflected.Thismakestheinsidesurfaceoftheclearplasticaperfectmirrorforsuchrays,withoutanyneed
forthesilveringusedoncommonmirrors.Differentcombinationsofmaterialshavedifferentcriticalangles,but
anycombinationwith n >n canproducetotalinternalreflection.Thesamecalculationasmadehereshows
1 2
thatthecriticalangleforaraygoingfromwatertoairis 48.6°,whereasthatfromdiamondtoairis 24.4°,and
that from flint glass to crown glass is 66.3°.
1.3 CheckYourUnderstandingAtthesurfacebetweenairandwater,lightrayscangofromairtowaterand
from water to air. For which ray is there no possibility of total internal reflection?
Inthephotothatopensthischapter,theimageofaswimmerunderwateriscapturedbyacamerathatisalsounderwater.
Theswimmerintheupperhalfofthephotograph,apparentlyfacingupward,is,infact,areflectedimageoftheswimmer
below.Thecircularripplenearthephotograph’scenterisactuallyonthewatersurface.Theundisturbedwatersurrounding
it makes a good reflecting surface when viewed from below, thanks to total internal reflection. However, at the very top
edge ofthis photograph, rays from below strike the surface with incident angles less than the critical angle, allowing the
camera to capture a view of activities on the pool deck above water.
Fiber Optics: Endoscopes to Telephones
Fiber optics is one application of total internal reflection that is in wide use. In communications, it is used to transmit
telephone, internet, and cable TV signals. Fiber optics employs the transmission of light down fibers of plastic or glass.
Becausethefibersarethin,lightenteringoneislikelytostriketheinsidesurfaceatananglegreaterthanthecriticalangle
and,thus,betotallyreflected(Figure1.15).Theindexofrefractionoutsidethefibermustbesmallerthaninside.Infact,
mostfibershaveavaryingrefractiveindextoallowmorelighttobeguidedalongthefiberthroughtotalinternalrefraction.
Rays are reflected around corners as shown, making the fibers into tiny light pipes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 21
Figure 1.15 Light entering a thin optic fiber may strike the inside surface at large
or grazing angles and is completely reflected if these angles exceed the critical
angle. Such rays continue down the fiber, even following it around corners, since
the angles of reflection and incidence remain large.
Bundles of fibers can be used to transmit an image without a lens, as illustrated in Figure 1.16. The output of a device
calledanendoscopeisshowninFigure1.16(b).Endoscopesareusedtoexploretheinteriorofthebodythroughitsnatural
orificesorminorincisions.Lightistransmitteddownonefiberbundletoilluminateinternalparts,andthereflectedlightis
transmitted back out through another bundle to be observed.
Figure 1.16 (a) An image “A” is transmitted by a bundle of optical fibers. (b) An endoscope is used to probe the body,
both transmitting light to the interior and returning an image such as the one shown of a human epiglottis (a structure at
the base of the tongue). (credit b: modification of work by “Med_Chaos”/Wikimedia Commons)
Fiberopticshasrevolutionizedsurgicaltechniquesandobservationswithinthebody,withahostofmedicaldiagnosticand
therapeutic uses. Surgery can be performed, such as arthroscopic surgery on a knee or shoulder joint, employing cutting
toolsattachedtoandobservedwiththeendoscope.Samplescanalsobeobtained,suchasbylassoinganintestinalpolyp
forexternalexamination.Theflexibilityofthefiberopticbundleallowsdoctorstonavigateitaroundsmallanddifficult-to-
reachregionsinthebody,suchastheintestines,theheart,bloodvessels,andjoints.Transmissionofanintenselaserbeam
toburnawayobstructingplaquesinmajorarteries,aswellasdeliveringlighttoactivatechemotherapydrugs,arebecoming
commonplace.Opticalfibershaveinfactenabledmicrosurgeryandremotesurgerywheretheincisionsaresmallandthe

22 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
surgeon’s fingers do not need to touch the diseased tissue.
Opticalfibersinbundlesaresurroundedbyacladdingmaterialthathasalowerindexofrefractionthanthecore(Figure
1.17).The cladding prevents light frombeing transmitted between fibers inabundle. Without cladding, light could pass
betweenfibersincontact,sincetheirindicesofrefractionareidentical.Sincenolightgetsintothecladding(thereistotal
internal reflection back into the core), none can be transmitted between clad fibers that are in contact with one another.
Instead,thelightispropagatedalongthelengthofthefiber,minimizingthelossofsignalandensuringthataqualityimage
is formed at the other end. The cladding and an additional protective layer make optical fibers durable as well as flexible.
Figure 1.17 Fibers in bundles are clad by a material that has a
lower index of refraction than the core to ensure total internal
reflection, even when fibers are in contact with one another.
Specialtinylensesthatcanbeattachedtotheendsofbundlesoffibershavebeendesignedandfabricated.Lightemerging
from a fiber bundle can be focused through such a lens, imaging a tiny spot. In some cases, the spot can be scanned,
allowingqualityimagingofaregioninsidethebody.Specialminuteopticalfiltersinsertedattheendofthefiberbundle
havethecapacitytoimagetheinterioroforganslocatedtensofmicronsbelowthesurfacewithoutcuttingthesurface—an
areaknownasnonintrusivediagnostics.Thisisparticularlyusefulfordeterminingtheextentofcancersinthestomachand
bowel.
Inanothertypeofapplication,opticalfibersarecommonlyusedtocarrysignalsfortelephoneconversationsandinternet
communications. Extensive optical fiber cables have been placed on the ocean floor and underground to enable optical
communications. Optical fiber communication systems offer several advantages over electrical (copper)-based systems,
particularlyforlongdistances.Thefiberscanbemadesotransparentthatlightcantravelmanykilometersbeforeitbecomes
dimenoughtorequireamplification—muchsuperiortocopperconductors.Thispropertyofopticalfibersiscalledlowloss.
Lasersemitlightwithcharacteristicsthatallowfarmoreconversationsinonefiberthanarepossiblewithelectricsignals
onasingleconductor.Thispropertyofopticalfibersiscalledhighbandwidth.Opticalsignalsinonefiberdonotproduce
undesirableeffectsinotheradjacentfibers.Thispropertyofopticalfibersiscalledreducedcrosstalk.Weshallexplorethe
unique characteristics of laser radiation in a later chapter.
Corner Reflectors and Diamonds
Corner reflectors (The Law of Reflection) are perfectly efficient when the conditions for total internal reflection are
satisfied.Withcommonmaterials,itiseasytoobtainacriticalanglethatislessthan 45°. Oneuseoftheseperfectmirrors
is in binoculars, as shown inFigure 1.18. Another use is in periscopes found in submarines.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 23
Figure 1.18 These binoculars employ corner reflectors
(prisms) with total internal reflection to get light to the
observer’s eyes.
Totalinternalreflection,coupledwithalargeindexofrefraction,explainswhydiamondssparklemorethanothermaterials.
Thecriticalangleforadiamond-to-airsurfaceisonly 24.4°,sowhenlightentersadiamond,ithastroublegettingback
out(Figure 1.19).Althoughlightfreelyentersthediamond,itcanexitonlyifitmakesananglelessthan 24.4°.Facets
ondiamondsarespecificallyintendedtomakethisunlikely.Gooddiamondsareveryclear,sothatthelightmakesmany
internalreflectionsandisconcentratedbeforeexiting—hencethebrightsparkle.(Zirconisanaturalgemstonethathasan
exceptionally large index of refraction, but it is not as large as diamond, so it is not as highly prized. Cubic zirconia is
manufactured and has an even higher index of refraction (≈2.17), but it is still less than that of diamond.) The colors
youseeemergingfromacleardiamondarenotduetothediamond’scolor,whichisusuallynearlycolorless.Thecolors
resultfromdispersion,whichwediscussinDispersion.Coloreddiamondsgettheircolorfromstructuraldefectsofthe
crystallatticeandtheinclusionofminutequantitiesofgraphiteandothermaterials.TheArgyleMineinWesternAustralia
producesaround90%oftheworld’spink,red,champagne,andcognacdiamonds,whereasaround50%oftheworld’sclear
diamonds come from central and southern Africa.
Figure 1.19 Light cannot easily escape a diamond, because its
critical angle with air is so small. Most reflections are total, and
the facets are placed so that light can exit only in particular
ways—thus concentrating the light and making the diamond
sparkle brightly.