# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 546-554
############################################################

536 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
12.1 | The Biot-Savart Law
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how to derive a magnetic field from an arbitrary current in a line segment
• Calculate magnetic field from the Biot-Savart law in specific geometries, such as a current in a
line and a current in a circular arc
Wehaveseenthatmassproducesagravitationalfieldandalsointeractswiththatfield.Chargeproducesanelectricfield
andalsointeractswiththatfield.Sincemovingcharge(thatis,current)interactswithamagneticfield,wemightexpectthat
it also creates that field—and it does.
TheequationusedtocalculatethemagneticfieldproducedbyacurrentisknownastheBiot-Savartlaw.Itisanempirical
law named in honor of two scientists who investigated the interaction between a straight, current-carrying wire and a
permanentmagnet.Thislawenablesustocalculatethemagnitudeanddirectionofthemagneticfieldproducedbyacurrent
→ →
inawire.TheBiot-SavartlawstatesthatatanypointP(Figure12.2),themagneticfield d B duetoanelement d l
of a current-carrying wire is given by
d → B = µ 0 Id → l × ^ r . (12.1)
4π r2
→
Figure 12.2 A current element Id l produces a magnetic field at
pointPgiven by the Biot-Savart law.
The constant µ is known as thepermeability of free spaceand is exactly
0
µ =4π×10 −7 T⋅m/A (12.2)
0
→
intheSIsystem.Theinfinitesimalwiresegment d l isinthesamedirectionasthecurrentI(assumedpositive),risthe
distance from d → l toPand ^ r is a unit vector that points from d → l toP, as shown in the figure.
Thedirectionof d → B isdeterminedbyapplyingtheright-handruletothevectorproduct d → l × ^ r. Themagnitudeof
→
d B is
dB= µ 0 Idlsinθ (12.3)
4π r2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 537
where θ istheanglebetween d → l and ^ r. Noticethatif θ=0, then d → B = → 0 . Thefieldproducedbyacurrent
→ →
element Id l has no component parallel to d l .
Themagneticfieldduetoafinitelengthofcurrent-carryingwireisfoundbyintegratingEquation 12.3alongthewire,
giving us the usual form of the Biot-Savart law.
Biot-Savart law
→ →
The magnetic field B due to an element d l of a current-carrying wire is given by
→ B = µ 0 ⌠ Id → l × ^ r . (12.4)
4π ⌡ r2
wire
Since this is a vector integral, contributions from different current elements may not point in the same direction.
Consequently,theintegralisoftendifficulttoevaluate,evenforfairlysimplegeometries.Thefollowingstrategymaybe
helpful.
Problem-Solving Strategy: Solving Biot-Savart Problems
To solve Biot-Savart law problems, the following steps are helpful:
1. IdentifythattheBiot-Savartlawisthechosenmethodtosolvethegivenproblem.Ifthereissymmetryinthe
→ →
problem comparing B and d l , Ampère’s law may be the preferred method to solve the question.
2. Drawthecurrentelementlength d → l andtheunitvector ^ r, notingthat d → l pointsinthedirectionof
the current and ^ r points from the current element toward the point where the field is desired.
3. Calculatethecrossproduct d → l × ^ r. Theresultantvectorgivesthedirectionofthemagneticfieldaccording
to the Biot-Savart law.
4. UseEquation12.4andsubstituteallgivenquantitiesintotheexpressiontosolveforthemagneticfield.Note
all variables that remain constant over the entire length of the wire may be factored out of the integration.
5. Usetheright-handruletoverifythedirectionofthemagneticfieldproducedfromthecurrentortowritedown
the direction of the magnetic field if only the magnitude was solved for in the previous part.
Example 12.1
Calculating Magnetic Fields of Short Current Segments
Ashortwireoflength1.0cmcarriesacurrentof2.0Aintheverticaldirection(Figure 12.3).Therestofthe
wireisshieldedsoitdoesnotaddtothemagneticfieldproducedbythewire.Calculatethemagneticfieldatpoint
P, which is 1 meter from the wire in thex-direction.

538 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
Figure 12.3 A small line segment carries a currentIin the vertical direction.
What is the magnetic field at a distancexfrom the segment?
Strategy
We can determine the magnetic field at point P using the Biot-Savart law. Since the current segment is much
smallerthanthedistancex,wecandroptheintegralfromtheexpression.Theintegrationisconvertedbackinto
a summation, but only for small dl, which we now write as Δl. Another way to think about it is that each of
theradiusvaluesisnearlythesame,nomatterwherethecurrentelementisonthelinesegment,if Δl issmall
comparedtox.Theangle θ iscalculatedusingatangentfunction.Usingthenumbersgiven,wecancalculatethe
magnetic field atP.
Solution
The angle between Δ → l and ^ r is calculated from trigonometry, knowing the distances l and x from the
problem:
θ=tan−1⎛ 1m ⎞
=89.4°.
⎝0.01m⎠
The magnetic field at pointPis calculated by the Biot-Savart law:
B= µ 0 IΔlsinθ =(1×10 −7 T⋅m/A) ⎛ ⎜ 2A(0.01m)sin(89.4°) ⎞ ⎟=2.0×10 −9 T.
4π r2 ⎝ (1m)2 ⎠
From the right-hand rule and the Biot-Savart law, the field is directed into the page.
Significance
This approximation is only good if the length of the line segment is very small compared to the distance from
thecurrentelementtothepoint.Ifnot,theintegralformoftheBiot-Savartlawmustbeusedovertheentireline
segment to calculate the magnetic field.
12.1 CheckYourUnderstandingUsingExample12.1,atwhatdistancewouldPhavetobetomeasurea
magnetic field half of the given answer?
Example 12.2
Calculating Magnetic Field of a Circular Arc of Wire
A wire carries a current I in a circular arc with radius R swept through an arbitrary angle θ (Figure 12.4).
Calculate the magnetic field at the center of this arc at pointP.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 539
Figure 12.4 A wire segment carrying a currentI. The path
→ ^
d l and radial direction r are indicated.
Strategy
WecandeterminethemagneticfieldatpointPusingtheBiot-Savartlaw.Theradialandpathlengthdirections
arealwaysatarightangle,sothecrossproductturnsintomultiplication.Wealsoknowthatthedistancealongthe
pathdlisrelatedtotheradiustimestheangle θ (inradians).Thenwecanpullallconstantsoutoftheintegration
and solve for the magnetic field.
Solution
The Biot-Savart law starts with the following equation:
→ B = µ 0 ⌠ Id → l × ^ r .
4π ⌡ r2
wire
As we integrate along the arc, all the contributions to the magnetic field are in the same direction (out of the
page),sowecanworkwiththemagnitude ofthefield. Thecrossproductturnsintomultiplication because the
pathdland the radial direction are perpendicular. We can also substitute the arc length formula, dl=rdθ:
B= µ 0 ⌠ Irdθ .
4π ⌡ r2
wire
Thecurrentandradiuscanbepulledoutoftheintegralbecausetheyarethesameregardlessofwhereweareon
the path. This leaves only the integral over the angle,
µ I
B= 0 ∫ dθ.
4πr
wire
The angle varies on the wire from 0 to θ; hence, the result is
µ Iθ
B= 0 .
4πr
Significance
The direction of the magnetic field at point P is determined by the right-hand rule, as shown in the previous
chapter. If there are other wires in the diagram along with the arc, and you are asked to find the net magnetic
field,findeachcontributionfromawireorarcandaddtheresultsbysuperpositionofvectors.Makesuretopay
attentiontothedirectionofeachcontribution.Alsonotethatinasymmetricsituation,likeastraightorcircular
wire, contributions from opposite sides of pointPcancel each other.
12.2 Check Your Understanding The wire loop forms a full circle of radius R and current I. What is the
magnitude of the magnetic field at the center?

540 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
12.2 | Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how the Biot-Savart law is used to determine the magnetic field due to a thin, straight
wire.
• Determine the dependence of the magnetic field from a thin, straight wire based on the
distance from it and the current flowing in the wire.
• Sketch the magnetic field created from a thin, straight wire by using the second right-hand rule.
How much current is needed to produce a significant magnetic field, perhaps as strong as Earth’s field? Surveyors will
tellyouthatoverheadelectricpowerlinescreatemagneticfieldsthatinterferewiththeircompassreadings.Indeed,when
Oersted discovered in 1820 that a current in a wire affected a compass needle, he was not dealing with extremely large
currents.Howdoestheshapeofwirescarryingcurrentaffecttheshapeofthemagneticfieldcreated?WenotedinChapter
28thatacurrentloopcreatedamagneticfieldsimilartothatofabarmagnet,butwhataboutastraightwire?Wecanuse
the Biot-Savart law to answer all of these questions, including determining the magnetic field of a long straight wire.
Figure12.5showsasectionofaninfinitelylong,straightwirethatcarriesacurrentI.Whatisthemagneticfieldatapoint
P, located a distanceRfrom the wire?
Figure 12.5 A section of a thin, straight current-carrying wire. The independent variable θ has the limits
θ and θ .
1 2
Let’sbeginbyconsideringthemagneticfieldduetothecurrentelement Id → x locatedatthepositionx.Usingtheright-
hand rule 1 from the previous chapter, d → x × ^ r points out of the page for any element along the wire. At point P,
therefore,themagneticfieldsduetoallcurrentelementshavethesamedirection.Thismeansthatwecancalculatethenet
field there by evaluating the scalar sum of the contributions of the elements. With |d → x × ^ r|=(dx)(1)sinθ, we have
from the Biot-Savart law
B= µ 0 ⌠ Isinθdx . (12.5)
4π ⌡ r2
wire
The wire is symmetrical about point O, so we can set the limits of the integration from zero to infinity and double the
answer, rather than integrate from negative infinity to positive infinity. Based on the picture and geometry, we can write
expressions forrand sinθ in terms ofxandR, namely:
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 541
r = x2+R2
R
sinθ = .
x2+R2
Substituting these expressions intoEquation 12.5, the magnetic field integration becomes
∞ (12.6)
B= µ o I⌠ Rdx .
2π ⌡ (x2+R2) 3/2
0
Evaluating the integral yields
B= µ o I⎡ ⎢ x ⎤ ⎥ ∞ . (12.7)
2πR ⎣(x2+R2) 1/2⎦ 0
Substituting the limits gives us the solution
µ I (12.8)
B= o .
2πR
Themagneticfieldlinesoftheinfinitewirearecircularandcenteredatthewire(Figure 12.6),andtheyareidenticalin
everyplaneperpendiculartothewire.Sincethefielddecreaseswithdistancefromthewire,thespacingofthefieldlines
mustincreasecorrespondinglywithdistance.Thedirectionofthismagneticfieldmaybefoundwithasecondformofthe
right-handrule(illustratedinFigure12.6).Ifyouholdthewirewithyourrighthandsothatyourthumbpointsalongthe
→
current, then your fingers wrap around the wire in the same sense as B .
→
Figure 12.6 Some magnetic field lines of an infinite wire. The direction of B can be found with a form of
the right-hand rule.
Thedirectionofthefieldlinescanbeobservedexperimentallybyplacingseveralsmallcompassneedlesonacirclenear
thewire,asillustratedinFigure12.7.Whenthereisnocurrentinthewire,theneedlesalignwithEarth’smagneticfield.
However, when a large current is sent through the wire, the compass needles all point tangent to the circle. Iron filings
sprinkled on a horizontal surface also delineate the field lines, as shown inFigure 12.7.

542 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
Figure 12.7 The shape of the magnetic field lines of a long wire can be seen
using (a) small compass needles and (b) iron filings.
Example 12.3
Calculating Magnetic Field Due to Three Wires
Threewiressitatthecornersofasquare,allcarryingcurrentsof2ampsintothepageasshowninFigure12.8.
Calculatethemagnitudeofthemagneticfieldattheothercornerofthesquare,pointP,ifthelengthofeachside
of the square is 1 cm.
Figure 12.8 Three wires have current flowing into the page.
The magnetic field is determined at the fourth corner of the
square.
Strategy
Themagneticfieldduetoeachwireatthedesiredpointiscalculated.Thediagonaldistanceiscalculatedusingthe
Pythagoreantheorem.Next,thedirectionofeachmagneticfield’scontributionisdeterminedbydrawingacircle
centeredatthepointofthewireandouttowardthedesiredpoint.Thedirectionofthemagneticfieldcontribution
from that wire is tangential to the curve. Lastly, working with these vectors, the resultant is calculated.
Solution
Wires 1 and 3 both have the same magnitude of magnetic field contribution at pointP:
B =B = µ o I = (4π×10 −7 T⋅m/A)(2A) =4×10 −5 T.
1 3 2πR 2π(0.01m)
Wire 2 has a longer distance and a magnetic field contribution at pointPof:
B = µ o I = (4π×10 −7 T⋅m/A)(2A) =3×10 −5 T.
2 2πR 2π(0.01414m)
The vectors for each of these magnetic field contributions are shown.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 543
The magnetic field in thex-direction has contributions from wire 3 and thex-component of wire 2:
B netx=−4×10 −5 T−2.83×10 −5 Tcos(45°)=−6×10 −5 T.
They-component is similarly the contributions from wire 1 and they-component of wire 2:
B nety=−4×10 −5 T−2.83×10 −5 Tsin(45°)=−6×10 −5 T.
Therefore, the net magnetic field is the resultant of these two components:
B net = B n 2 etx+B n 2 ety
B = (−6×10 −5 T)2+(−6×10 −5 T)2
net
B =8×10 −5 T.
net
Significance
Thegeometryinthisproblemresultsinthemagneticfieldcontributionsinthex-andy-directionshavingthesame
magnitude. This is not necessarily the case if the currents were different values or if the wires were located in
differentpositions.Regardlessofthenumericalresults,workingonthecomponentsofthevectorswillyieldthe
resulting magnetic field at the point in need.
12.3 Check Your Understanding Using Example 12.3, keeping the currents the same in wires 1 and 3,
whatshouldthecurrentbeinwire2tocounteractthemagneticfieldsfromwires1and3sothatthereisnonet
magnetic field at point P?
12.3 | Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how parallel wires carrying currents can attract or repel each other
• Define the ampere and describe how it is related to current-carrying wires
• Calculate the force of attraction or repulsion between two current-carrying wires
Youmightexpectthattwocurrent-carryingwiresgeneratesignificantforcesbetweenthem,sinceordinarycurrentsproduce
magnetic fields and these fields exert significant forces on ordinary currents. But you might not expect that the force
betweenwiresisusedtodefinetheampere.Itmightalsosurpriseyoutolearnthatthisforcehassomethingtodowithwhy
large circuit breakers burn up when they attempt to interrupt large currents.
Theforcebetweentwolong,straight,andparallelconductorsseparatedbyadistancercanbefoundbyapplyingwhatwe
havedevelopedintheprecedingsections.Figure 12.9showsthewires,theircurrents,thefieldcreatedbyonewire,and
theconsequentforcetheotherwireexperiencesfromthecreatedfield.Letusconsiderthefieldproducedbywire1andthe
force it exerts on wire 2 (call the force F ). The field due to I at a distanceris
2 1