# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 455-459
############################################################

9 • Chapter Review 443
force acting on this particle? into one another. Suppose two loaded train cars are
moving toward one another, the first having a mass
32 . The x-component of a force on a 46-g golf ball by a
of and a velocity of , and
7-iron versus time is plotted in the following figure:
the second having a mass of and a
velocity of . What is their final velocity?
36 . Two identical pucks collide elastically on an air
a. Find the x-component of the impulse during
hockey table. Puck 1 was originally at rest; puck 2
the intervals
has an incoming speed of 6.00 m/s and scatters at
i. [0, 50 ms], and
an angle of with respect to its incoming
ii. [50 ms, 100 ms]
direction. What is the velocity (magnitude and
b. Find the change in the x-component of the
direction) of puck 1 after the collision?
momentum during the intervals
iii. [0, 50 ms], and
iv. [50 ms, 100 ms]
33 . A hockey puck of mass 150 g is sliding due east
on a frictionless table with a speed of 10 m/s.
Suddenly, a constant force of magnitude 5 N and
direction due north is applied to the puck for 1.5
s. Find the north and east components of the
momentum at the end of the 1.5-s interval.
37 . The figure below shows a bullet of mass 200 g
traveling horizontally towards the east with
speed 400 m/s, which strikes a block of mass
1.5 kg that is initially at rest on a frictionless
table.
34 . A ball of mass 250 g is thrown with an initial
velocity of 25 m/s at an angle of with the
horizontal direction. Ignore air resistance. What
is the momentum of the ball after 0.2 s? (Do this
problem by finding the components of the
momentum first, and then constructing the
magnitude and direction of the momentum
vector from the components.)
After striking the block, the bullet is embedded
in the block and the block and the bullet move
together as one unit.
a. What is the magnitude and direction of the
velocity of the block/bullet combination
immediately after the impact?
b. What is the magnitude and direction of the
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
impulse by the block on the bullet?
35 . Train cars are coupled together by being bumped c. What is the magnitude and direction of the

444 9 • Chapter Review
impulse from the bullet on the block? demonstrated that nuclei were very small and dense
d. If it took 3 ms for the bullet to change the by scattering helium-4 nuclei from gold-197 nuclei.
speed from 400 m/s to the final speed The energy of the incoming helium nucleus was
after impact, what is the average force , and the masses of the helium and
between the block and the bullet during gold nuclei were and
this time? , respectively (note that their mass
ratio is 4 to 197).
38 . A 20-kg child is coasting at 3.3 m/s over flat a. If a helium nucleus scatters to an angle of
ground in a 4.0-kg wagon. during an elastic collision with a gold nucleus,
a. If the child drops a 1-kg ball out the back calculate the helium nucleus’s final speed and the
of the wagon, what is the final speed of the final velocity (magnitude and direction) of the gold
child and wagon? nucleus.
b. If the child drops a 1-kg ball out the back
of the wagon so that the ball is at rest
relative to the ground, what is the final
speed of the child and wagon?
39 . A 4.5 kg puffer fish expands to 40% of its mass
by taking in water. When the puffer fish is
threatened, it releases the water toward the b. What is the final kinetic energy of the helium
threat to move quickly forward. What is the ratio nucleus?
of the speed of the puffer fish forward to the
45 . A 90.0-kg ice hockey player hits a 0.150-kg
speed of the expelled water backwards?
puck, giving the puck a velocity of 45.0 m/s. If
40 . Explain why a cannon recoils when it fires a both are initially at rest and if the ice is
shell. frictionless, how far does the player recoil in the
time it takes the puck to reach the goal 15.0 m
41 . Two figure skaters are coasting in the same
away?
direction, with the leading skater moving at 5.5
m/s and the trailing skating moving at 6.2 m/s. 46 . A 100-g firecracker is launched vertically into
When the trailing skater catches up with the the air and explodes into two pieces at the peak
leading skater, he picks her up without applying of its trajectory. If a 72-g piece is projected
any horizontal forces on his skates. If the trailing horizontally to the left at 20 m/s, what is the
skater is 50% heavier than the 50-kg leading speed and direction of the other piece?
skater, what is their speed after he picks her up?
47 . In an elastic collision, a 400-kg bumper car
42 . A 2000-kg railway freight car coasts at 4.4 m/s collides directly from behind with a second,
underneath a grain terminal, which dumps grain identical bumper car that is traveling in the same
directly down into the freight car. If the speed of direction. The initial speed of the leading
the loaded freight car must not go below 3.0 m/ bumper car is 5.60 m/s and that of the trailing
s, what is the maximum mass of grain that it can car is 6.00 m/s. Assuming that the mass of the
accept? drivers is much, much less than that of the
bumper cars, what are their final speeds?
9.4 Types of Collisions
48 . Repeat the preceding problem if the mass of the
43 . A 5.50-kg bowling ball moving at 9.00 m/s
leading bumper car is 30.0% greater than that of
collides with a 0.850-kg bowling pin, which is
the trailing bumper car.
scattered at an angle of 15.8° to the initial
direction of the bowling ball and with a speed of 49 . An alpha particle (4He) undergoes an elastic
15.0 m/s. collision with a stationary uranium nucleus
a. Calculate the final velocity (magnitude and (235U). What percent of the kinetic energy of the
direction) of the bowling ball. alpha particle is transferred to the uranium
b. Is the collision elastic? nucleus? Assume the collision is one-
dimensional.
44 . Ernest Rutherford (the first New Zealander to be
50 . You are standing on a very slippery icy surface
awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry)
Access for free at openstax.org

9 • Chapter Review 445
and throw a 1-kg football horizontally at a speed The 1.0-kg part falls straight down after breakup
of 6.7 m/s. What is your velocity when you with an initial speed of 10.0 m/s, the 0.7-kg part
release the football? Assume your mass is 65 kg. moves in the original forward direction, and the
0.3-kg part goes straight up.
51 . A 35-kg child rides a relatively massless sled
down a hill and then coasts along the flat section
at the bottom, where a second 35-kg child
jumps on the sled as it passes by her. If the
speed of the sled is 3.5 m/s before the second
child jumps on, what is its speed after she jumps
on?
52 . A boy sleds down a hill and onto a frictionless
ice-covered lake at 10.0 m/s. In the middle of
the lake is a 1000-kg boulder. When the sled
crashes into the boulder, he is propelled
backwards from the boulder. The collision is an
elastic collision. If the boy’s mass is 40.0 kg and
the sled’s mass is 2.50 kg, what is the speed of
the sled and the boulder after the collision? a. Find the speeds of the 0.3-kg and 0.7-kg
pieces immediately after the break-up.
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
b. How high from the break-up point does the
53 . A 0.90-kg falcon is diving at 28.0 m/s at a downward 0.3-kg piece go before coming to rest?
angle of . It catches a 0.325-kg pigeon from c. Where does the 0.7-kg piece land relative to
behind in midair. What is their combined velocity where it was fired from?
after impact if the pigeon’s initial velocity was 7.00
m/s directed horizontally? Note that is a unit 56 . Two asteroids collide and stick together. The
vector pointing in the direction in which the falcon is first asteroid has mass of and is
initially flying. initially moving at 770 m/s. The second asteroid
has mass of and is moving at 1020
m/s. Their initial velocities made an angle of 20°
with respect to each other. What is the final
speed and direction with respect to the velocity
of the first asteroid?
57 . A 200-kg rocket in deep space moves with a
velocity of . Suddenly,
it explodes into three pieces, with the first (78
kg) moving at and
the second (56 kg) moving at
FIGURE 9.34 (credit “falcon”: modification of work by “USFWS . Find the velocity of
Mountain-Prairie”/Flickr; credit “pigeon”: modification of work
the third piece.
by Jacob Spinks)
58 . A proton traveling at scatters
54 . A billiard ball, labeled 1, moving horizontally
elastically from an initially stationary alpha
strikes another billiard ball, labeled 2, at rest.
particle and is deflected at an angle of 85° with
Before impact, ball 1 was moving at a speed of
respect to its initial velocity. Given that the alpha
3.00 m/s, and after impact it is moving at 0.50
particle has four times the mass of the proton,
m/s at 50° from the original direction. If the two
what percent of its initial kinetic energy does the
balls have equal masses of 300 g, what is the
proton retain after the collision?
velocity of the ball 2 after the impact?
59 . Three 70-kg deer are standing on a flat 200-kg
55 . A projectile of mass 2.0 kg is fired in the air at an
rock that is on an ice-covered pond. A gunshot
angle of 40.0 to the horizon at a speed of 50.0 m/s.
goes off and the deer scatter, with deer A
At the highest point in its flight, the projectile breaks
running at , deer B
into three parts of mass 1.0 kg, 0.7 kg, and 0.3 kg.

446 9 • Chapter Review
running at , and deer C uniformly in different circles of radii and
running at . What is about origin in the x, y-plane. The x- and
the velocity of the rock on which they were y-coordinates of the center of mass and that of
standing? particle 1 are given as follows (where length is in
meters and t in seconds):
60 . A family is skating. The father (75 kg) skates at
8.2 m/s and collides and sticks to the mother
(50 kg), who was initially moving at 3.3 m/s and
and:
at 45° with respect to the father’s velocity. The
pair then collides with their daughter (30 kg),
a. Find the radius of the circle in which
who was stationary, and the three slide off
particle 1 moves.
together. What is their final velocity?
b. Find the x- and y-coordinates of particle 2
61 . An oxygen atom (mass 16 u) moving at 733 m/s and the radius of the circle this particle
at 15.0° with respect to the direction collides moves.
and sticks to an oxygen molecule (mass 32 u)
67 . Two particles of masses and move
moving at 528 m/s at 128° with respect to the
uniformly in different circles of radii and
direction. The two stick together to form ozone.
about the origin in the x, y-plane. The
What is the final velocity of the ozone molecule?
coordinates of the two particles in meters are
62 . Two cars of the same mass approach an
given as follows ( for both). Here t is in
extremely icy four-way perpendicular
seconds:
intersection. Car A travels northward at 30 m/s
and car B is travelling eastward. They collide and
stick together, traveling at 28° north of east.
What was the initial velocity of car B?
9.6 Center of Mass
a. Find the radii of the circles of motion of
63 . Three point masses are placed at the corners of both particles.
a triangle as shown in the figure below. b. Find the x- and y-coordinates of the center
of mass.
c. Decide if the center of mass moves in a
circle by plotting its trajectory.
68 . Find the center of mass of a one-meter long rod,
made of 50 cm of iron (density ) and 50
cm of aluminum (density ).
Find the center of mass of the three-mass
system. 69 . Find the center of mass of a rod of length L
whose mass density changes from one end to
64 . Two particles of masses and separated
the other quadratically. That is, if the rod is laid
by a horizontal distance D are released from the
out along the x-axis with one end at the origin
same height h at the same time. Find the vertical
and the other end at , the density is given
position of the center of mass of these two
by , where and
particles at a time before the two particles strike
the ground. Assume no air resistance. are constant values.
65 . Two particles of masses and separated 70 . Find the center of mass of a rectangular block of
by a horizontal distance D are let go from the length a and width b that has a nonuniform
same height h at different times. Particle 1 starts density such that when the rectangle is placed in
at , and particle 2 is let go at . Find the x,y-plane with one corner at the origin and
the vertical position of the center of mass at a the block placed in the first quadrant with the
time before the first particle strikes the ground. two edges along the x- and y-axes, the density is
Assume no air resistance. given by , where is a constant.
66 . Two particles of masses and move 71 . Find the center of mass of a rectangular material
Access for free at openstax.org