# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 316-323
############################################################

304 6 • Chapter Review
, diameter 3.0 mm) is dropped 89 . A small diamond of mass 10.0 g drops from a
in a container of motor oil. It takes 12 s to fall a swimmer’s earring and falls through the water,
distance of 0.60 m. Calculate the viscosity of the reaching a terminal velocity of 2.0 m/s. (a)
oil. Assuming the frictional force on the diamond
obeys what is b? (b) How far does the
88 . Suppose that the resistive force of the air on a
diamond fall before it reaches 90 percent of its
skydiver can be approximated by If
terminal speed?
the terminal velocity of a 50.0-kg skydiver is
60.0 m/s, what is the value of b?
Additional Problems
90 . (a) What is the final velocity of a car originally
traveling at 50.0 km/h that accelerates opposite
to the motion at a rate of for 50.0 s?
Assume a coefficient of friction of 1.0. (b) What
is unreasonable about the result? (c) Which
premise is unreasonable, or which premises are
inconsistent?
91 . A 75.0-kg woman stands on a bathroom scale in
an elevator that accelerates from rest to 30.0
m/s in 2.00 s. (a) Calculate the scale reading in
newtons and compare it with her weight. (The
scale exerts an upward force on her equal to its
95 . As shown below, if what is the
reading.) (b) What is unreasonable about the
tension in the connecting string? The pulley and
result? (c) Which premise is unreasonable, or
all surfaces are frictionless.
which premises are inconsistent?
92 . (a) Calculate the minimum coefficient of friction
needed for a car to negotiate an unbanked 50.0
m radius curve at 30.0 m/s. (b) What is
unreasonable about the result? (c) Which
premises are unreasonable or inconsistent?
93 . As shown below, if what is the
tension in string 1?
96 . A small space probe is released from a
spaceship. The space probe has mass 20.0 kg
and contains 90.0 kg of fuel. It starts from rest in
deep space, from the origin of a coordinate
system based on the spaceship, and burns fuel
at the rate of 3.00 kg/s. The engine provides a
constant thrust of 120.0 N. (a) Write an
94 . As shown below, if and expression for the mass of the space probe as a
what is the magnitude of the acceleration of the function of time, between 0 and 30 seconds,
suspended object? All surfaces are frictionless. assuming that the engine ignites fuel beginning
at (b) What is the velocity after 15.0 s? (c)
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 305
What is the position of the space probe after at rest and in equilibrium. A time dependent
15.0 s, with initial position at the origin? (d) force of is applied at time , and its
Write an expression for the position as a function components are and
of time, for where p, q, and n are constants. Find the
position and velocity as functions of
97 . A half-full recycling bin has mass 3.0 kg and is
time t.
pushed up a incline with constant speed
under the action of a 26-N force acting up and
104 . A particle of mass m is located at the origin. It is
parallel to the incline. The incline has friction.
at rest and in equilibrium. A time-dependent
What magnitude force must act up and parallel
force of is applied at time , and its
to the incline for the bin to move down the
components are and
incline at constant velocity?
where p, q, and n are constants. Find the
98 . A child has mass 6.0 kg and slides down a position and velocity as functions of
incline with constant speed under the action of a time t.
13.4-N force acting up and parallel to the
105 . A 2.0-kg object has a velocity of at
incline. What is the coefficient of kinetic friction
A constant resultant force of
between the child and the surface of the incline?
then acts on the object for 3.0 s.
99 . The two barges shown here are coupled by a cable What is the magnitude of the object’s velocity at
of negligible mass. The mass of the front barge is the end of the 3.0-s interval?
and the mass of the rear barge is
106 . A 1.5-kg mass has an acceleration of
A tugboat pulls the front barge with
Only two forces act on the
a horizontal force of magnitude and
mass. If one of the forces is
the frictional forces of the water on the front and
what is the magnitude of the other force?
rear barges are and
respectively. Find the horizontal acceleration of the 107 . A box is dropped onto a conveyor belt moving at
barges and the tension in the connecting cable. 3.4 m/s. If the coefficient of friction between the
box and the belt is 0.27, how long will it take
before the box moves without slipping?
108 . Shown below is a 10.0-kg block being pushed by
a horizontal force of magnitude 200.0 N. The
coefficient of kinetic friction between the two
surfaces is 0.50. Find the acceleration of the
block.
100 . If the order of the barges of the preceding
exercise is reversed so that the tugboat pulls the
barge with a force of
what are the acceleration of the
barges and the tension in the coupling cable?
101 . An object with mass m moves along the x-axis. 109 . As shown below, the mass of block 1 is
Its position at any time is given by while the mass of block 2 is
where p and q are constants. The coefficient of friction between
Find the net force on this object for any time t. and the inclined surface is The
blocks are moving, with block 1 sliding up the
102 . A helicopter with mass has a
incline and block 2 moving down. What is the
position given by
acceleration of the system?
Find
the net force on the helicopter at
103 . Located at the origin, an electric car of mass m is

306 6 • Chapter Review
back of the flatbed truck, which is traveling at 100
km/h. Find the value of the coefficient of kinetic
friction between the road and crate if the crate
slides 50 m on the road in coming to rest. The initial
speed of the crate is the same as the truck, 100 km/
h.
110 . A student is attempting to move a 30-kg mini-
114 . A 15-kg sled is pulled across a horizontal, snow-
fridge into her dorm room. During a moment of
covered surface by a force applied to a rope at
inattention, the mini-fridge slides down a 35
30 degrees with the horizontal. The coefficient
degree incline at constant speed when she
of kinetic friction between the sled and the snow
applies a force of 25 N acting up and parallel to
is 0.20. (a) If the force is 33 N, what is the
the incline. What is the coefficient of kinetic
horizontal acceleration of the sled? (b) What
friction between the fridge and the surface of the
must the force be in order to pull the sled at
incline?
constant velocity?
111 . A crate of mass 100.0 kg rests on a rough
115 . A 30.0-g ball at the end of a string is swung in a
surface inclined at an angle of with the
vertical circle with a radius of 25.0 cm. The
horizontal. A massless rope to which a force can
tangential velocity is 200.0 cm/s. Find the
be applied parallel to the surface is attached to
tension in the string: (a) at the top of the circle,
the crate and leads to the top of the incline. In
(b) at the bottom of the circle, and (c) at a
its present state, the crate is just ready to slip
distance of 12.5 cm from the center of the circle
and start to move down the plane. The
coefficient of friction is of that for the static
case. (a) What is the coefficient of static friction? 116 . A particle of mass 0.50 kg starts moves through
(b) What is the maximum force that can be a circular path in the xy-plane with a position
applied upward along the plane on the rope and
given by
not move the block? (c) With a slightly greater
where r is in meters and t is in seconds. (a) Find
applied force, the block will slide up the plane.
the velocity and acceleration vectors as
Once it begins to move, what is its acceleration
functions of time. (b) Show that the acceleration
and what reduced force is necessary to keep it
vector always points toward the center of the
moving upward at constant speed? (d) If the
circle (and thus represents centripetal
block is given a slight nudge to get it started
acceleration). (c) Find the centripetal force
down the plane, what will be its acceleration in
vector as a function of time.
that direction? (e) Once the block begins to slide
downward, what upward force on the rope is 117 . A stunt cyclist rides on the interior of a cylinder
required to keep the block from accelerating 12 m in radius. The coefficient of static friction
downward? between the tires and the wall is 0.68. Find the
value of the minimum speed for the cyclist to
112 . A car is moving at high speed along a highway
perform the stunt.
when the driver makes an emergency braking.
The wheels become locked (stop rolling), and 118 . When a body of mass 0.25 kg is attached to a
the resulting skid marks are 32.0 meters long. If vertical massless spring, it is extended 5.0 cm
the coefficient of kinetic friction between tires from its unstretched length of 4.0 cm. The body
and road is 0.550, and the acceleration was and spring are placed on a horizontal frictionless
constant during braking, how fast was the car surface and rotated about the held end of the
going when the wheels became locked? spring at 2.0 rev/s. How far is the spring
stretched?
113 . A crate having mass 50.0 kg falls horizontally off the
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 307
119 . A piece of bacon starts to slide down the pan 125 . In the figure, the coefficient of kinetic friction
when one side of a pan is raised up 5.0 cm. If between the surface and the blocks is If
the length of the pan from pivot to the raising find an expression for the magnitude of
point is 23.5 cm, what is the coefficient of static the acceleration of either block (in terms of F,
friction between the pan and the bacon? and g).
120 . A plumb bob hangs from the roof of a railroad
car. The car rounds a circular track of radius
300.0 m at a speed of 90.0 km/h. At what angle
relative to the vertical does the plumb bob hang?
121 . An airplane flies at 120.0 m/s and banks at a
angle. If its mass is (a) what is
the magnitude of the lift force? (b) what is the
radius of the turn?
122 . The position of a particle is given by
where is a
126 . Two blocks are stacked as shown below, and rest on
constant. (a) Show that the particle moves in a
a frictionless surface. There is friction between the
circle of radius A. (b) Calculate and then
two blocks (coefficient of friction ). An external
show that the speed of the particle is a constant
force is applied to the top block at an angle with
(c) Determine and show that a is
the horizontal. What is the maximum force F that
given by (d) Calculate the centripetal
can be applied for the two blocks to move together?
force on the particle. [Hint: For (b) and (c), you
will need to use and
123 . Two blocks connected by a string are pulled across a
horizontal surface by a force applied to one of the
blocks, as shown below. The coefficient of kinetic
friction between the blocks and the surface is 0.25.
If each block has an acceleration of to the
right, what is the magnitude F of the applied force?
127 . A box rests on the (horizontal) back of a truck.
The coefficient of static friction between the box
and the surface on which it rests is 0.24. What
maximum distance can the truck travel (starting
from rest and moving horizontally with constant
124 . As shown below, the coefficient of kinetic friction acceleration) in 3.0 s without having the box
between the surface and the larger block is 0.20, slide?
and the coefficient of kinetic friction between the
128 . A double-incline plane is shown below. The
surface and the smaller block is 0.30. If
coefficient of friction on the left surface is 0.30,
and , what is the tension in the
and on the right surface 0.16. Calculate the
connecting string?
acceleration of the system.

308 6 • Chapter Review
Challenge Problems
129 . In a later chapter, you will find that the weight of
a particle varies with altitude such that
where is the radius of Earth and r
is the distance from Earth’s center. If the particle
is fired vertically with velocity from Earth’s
surface, determine its velocity as a function of
position r. (Hint: use the
rearrangement mentioned in the text.)
130 . A large centrifuge, like the one shown below, is used
to expose aspiring astronauts to accelerations
similar to those experienced in rocket launches and
atmospheric reentries. (a) At what angular velocity is
the centripetal acceleration 10g if the rider is 15.0 m
from the center of rotation? (b) The rider’s cage
hangs on a pivot at the end of the arm, allowing it to
swing outward during rotation as shown in the
bottom accompanying figure. At what angle below
the horizontal will the cage hang when the
centripetal acceleration is 10g? (Hint: The arm
supplies centripetal force and supports the weight
of the cage. Draw a free-body diagram of the forces
to see what the angle should be.)
131 . A car of mass 1000.0 kg is traveling along a level
road at 100.0 km/h when its brakes are applied.
Calculate the stopping distance if the coefficient
of kinetic friction of the tires is 0.500. Neglect air
resistance. (Hint: since the distance traveled is
of interest rather than the time, x is the desired
independent variable and not t. Use the Chain
Rule to change the variable:
132 . An airplane flying at 200.0 m/s makes a turn
that takes 4.0 min. What bank angle is required?
What is the percentage increase in the perceived
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 309
weight of the passengers? in a bottle of liquid shampoo. The terminal
speed is observed to be 2.00 cm/s. Find (a) the
133 . A skydiver is at an altitude of 1520 m. After 10.0
value of the constant b in the equation
seconds of free fall, he opens his parachute and
and (b) the value of the
finds that the air resistance, , is given by the
resistive force when the bead reaches terminal
formula where b is a constant and v
speed.
is the velocity. If and the mass of the
skydiver is 82.0 kg, first set up differential 135 . A boater and motor boat are at rest on a lake.
equations for the velocity and the position, and Together, they have mass 200.0 kg. If the thrust
then find: (a) the speed of the skydiver when the of the motor is a constant force of 40.0 N in the
parachute opens, (b) the distance fallen before direction of motion, and if the resistive force of
the parachute opens, (c) the terminal velocity the water is numerically equivalent to 2 times
after the parachute opens (find the limiting the speed v of the boat, set up and solve the
velocity), and (d) the time the skydiver is in the differential equation to find: (a) the velocity of
air after the parachute opens. the boat at time t; (b) the limiting velocity (the
velocity after a long time has passed).
134 . In a television commercial, a small, spherical
bead of mass 4.00 g is released from rest at

310 6 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org