# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 19-26
############################################################

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 9
A thermometer measures its own temperature. It is through the concepts of thermal equilibrium and the zeroth law of
thermodynamicsthatwecansaythatathermometermeasuresthetemperatureofsomethingelse,andtomakesenseofthe
statement that two objects are at the same temperature.
Intherestofthischapter,wewilloftenreferto“systems”insteadof“objects.”Asinthechapteronlinearmomentumand
collisions,asystemconsistsofoneormoreobjects—butinthermodynamics,werequireasystemtobemacroscopic,that
is,toconsistofahugenumber(suchas 10 23)ofmolecules.Thenwecansaythatasystemisinthermalequilibriumwith
itselfifallpartsofitareatthesametemperature.(Wewillreturntothedefinitionofathermodynamicsysteminthechapter
on the first law of thermodynamics.)
1.2 | Thermometers and Temperature Scales
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe several different types of thermometers
• Convert temperatures between the Celsius, Fahrenheit, and Kelvin scales
Anyphysicalpropertythatdependsconsistentlyandreproduciblyontemperaturecanbeusedasthebasisofathermometer.
For example, volume increases with temperature for most substances. This property is the basis for the common alcohol
thermometer and the original mercury thermometers. Other properties used to measure temperature include electrical
resistance, color, and the emission of infrared radiation (Figure 1.3).

10 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
Figure 1.3 Because many physical properties depend on temperature, the variety of thermometers is remarkable. (a) In this
common type of thermometer, the alcohol, containing a red dye, expands more rapidly than the glass encasing it. When the
thermometer’s temperature increases, the liquid from the bulb is forced into the narrow tube, producing a large change in the
length of the column for a small change in temperature. (b) Each of the six squares on this plastic (liquid crystal) thermometer
contains a film of a different heat-sensitive liquid crystal material. Below 95°F, all six squares are black. When the plastic
thermometer is exposed to a temperature of 95°F, the first liquid crystal square changes color. When the temperature reaches
above 96.8°F, the second liquid crystal square also changes color, and so forth. (c) A firefighter uses a pyrometer to check the
temperature of an aircraft carrier’s ventilation system. The pyrometer measures infrared radiation (whose emission varies with
temperature) from the vent and quickly produces a temperature readout. Infrared thermometers are also frequently used to
measure body temperature by gently placing them in the ear canal. Such thermometers are more accurate than the alcohol
thermometers placed under the tongue or in the armpit. (credit b: modification of work by Tess Watson; credit c: modification of
work by Lamel J. Hinton, U.S. Navy)
Thermometersmeasuretemperatureaccordingtowell-definedscalesofmeasurement.Thethreemostcommontemperature
scales are Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin. Temperature scales are created by identifying two reproducible temperatures.
The freezing and boiling temperatures of water at standard atmospheric pressure are commonly used.
OntheCelsiusscale,thefreezingpointofwateris 0°C andtheboilingpointis 100°C. Theunitoftemperatureonthis
scaleisthedegreeCelsius (°C).TheFahrenheitscale(stillthemostfrequentlyusedforcommonpurposesintheUnited
States)hasthefreezingpointofwaterat 32°F andtheboilingpointat 212°F. ItsunitisthedegreeFahrenheit(°F).
Youcanseethat100Celsiusdegreesspanthesamerangeas180Fahrenheitdegrees.Thus,atemperaturedifferenceofone
degree on the Celsius scale is 1.8 times as large as a difference of one degree on the Fahrenheit scale, or ΔT = 9 ΔT .
F 5 C
The definition of temperature in terms of molecular motion suggests that there should be a lowest possible temperature,
where the average kinetic energy of molecules is zero (or the minimum allowed by quantum mechanics). Experiments
confirmtheexistenceofsuchatemperature,calledabsolutezero.Anabsolutetemperaturescaleisonewhosezeropoint
isabsolutezero.Suchscalesareconvenientinsciencebecauseseveralphysicalquantities,suchasthevolumeofanideal
gas, are directly related to absolute temperature.
TheKelvinscaleistheabsolutetemperaturescalethatiscommonlyusedinscience.TheSItemperatureunitisthekelvin,
which is abbreviated K (not accompanied by a degree sign). Thus 0 K is absolute zero. The freezing and boiling points
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 11
ofwaterare273.15Kand373.15K,respectively.Therefore,temperaturedifferencesarethesameinunitsofkelvinsand
degrees Celsius, or ΔT C=ΔT K.
The relationships between the three common temperature scales are shown in Figure 1.4. Temperatures on these scales
can be converted using the equations inTable 1.1.
Figure 1.4 Relationships between the Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin temperature scales are shown. The relative sizes
of the scales are also shown.
To convert from… Use this equation…
Celsius to Fahrenheit T = 9T +32
F 5 C
Fahrenheit to Celsius T = 5⎛T −32⎞
C 9⎝ F ⎠
Celsius to Kelvin T =T +273.15
K C
Kelvin to Celsius T =T −273.15
C K
Fahrenheit to Kelvin T = 5⎛T −32⎞+273.15
K 9⎝ F ⎠
Kelvin to Fahrenheit T = 9⎛T −273.15⎞+32
F 5⎝ K ⎠
Table 1.1Temperature Conversions
To convert between Fahrenheit and Kelvin, convert to Celsius as an intermediate step.
Example 1.1
Converting between Temperature Scales: Room Temperature
“Roomtemperature”isgenerallydefinedinphysicstobe 25°C.(a)Whatisroomtemperaturein °F?(b)What
is it in K?
Strategy
Toanswerthesequestions,allweneedtodoischoosethecorrectconversionequationsandsubstitutetheknown
values.
Solution
To convert from °C to °F, use the equation

12 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
T = 9T +32.
F 5 C
Substitute the known value into the equation and solve:
T = 9 (25°C)+32=77°F.
F 5
Similarly, we find that T =T +273.15=298K.
K C
The Kelvin scale is part of the SI system of units, so its actual definition is more complicated than the one given above.
First,itisnotdefinedintermsofthefreezingandboilingpointsofwater,butintermsofthetriplepoint.Thetriplepoint
is the unique combination of temperature and pressure at which ice, liquid water, and water vapor can coexist stably. As
willbediscussedinthesectiononphasechanges,thecoexistenceisachievedbyloweringthepressureandconsequently
the boiling point to reach the freezing point. The triple-point temperature is defined as 273.16 K. This definition has the
advantage that although the freezing temperature and boiling temperature of water depend on pressure, there is only one
triple-point temperature.
Second, even with two points on the scale defined, different thermometers give somewhat different results for other
temperatures. Therefore, a standard thermometer is required. Metrologists (experts in the science of measurement) have
chosentheconstant-volumegasthermometerforthispurpose.Avesselofconstantvolumefilledwithgasissubjectedto
temperaturechanges,andthemeasuredtemperatureisproportionaltothechangeinpressure.Using“TP”torepresentthe
triple point,
p
T = p T TP .
TP
Theresultsdependsomewhatonthechoiceofgas,butthelessdensethegasinthebulb,thebettertheresultsfordifferent
gasesagree.Iftheresultsareextrapolatedtozerodensity,theresultsagreequitewell,withzeropressurecorrespondingto
a temperature of absolute zero.
Constant-volumegasthermometersarebigandcometoequilibriumslowly,sotheyareusedmostlyasstandardstocalibrate
other thermometers.
Visitthissite(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21consvolgasth)tolearnmoreabouttheconstant-volumegas
thermometer.
1.3 | Thermal Expansion
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Answer qualitative questions about the effects of thermal expansion
• Solve problems involving thermal expansion, including those involving thermal stress
Theexpansionofalcoholinathermometerisoneofmanycommonlyencounteredexamplesofthermalexpansion,which
isthechangeinsizeorvolumeofagivensystemasitstemperaturechanges.Themostvisibleexampleistheexpansionof
hotair.Whenairisheated,itexpandsandbecomeslessdensethanthesurroundingair,whichthenexertsan(upward)force
onthehotairandmakessteamandsmokerise,hotairballoonsfloat,andsoforth.Thesamebehaviorhappensinallliquids
andgases,drivingnaturalheattransferupwardinhomes,oceans,andweathersystems,aswewilldiscussinanupcoming
section. Solidsalsoundergothermal expansion. Railroad tracks andbridges,forexample, haveexpansion joints toallow
them to freely expand and contract with temperature changes, as shown inFigure 1.5.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 13
Figure 1.5 (a) Thermal expansion joints like these in the (b) Auckland Harbour Bridge in New Zealand allow bridges to
change length without buckling. (credit: modification of works by “ŠJů”/Wikimedia Commons)
What is the underlying cause of thermal expansion? As previously mentioned, an increase in temperature means an
increase in the kinetic energy of individual atoms. In a solid, unlike in a gas, the molecules are held in place by forces
from neighboring molecules; as we saw in Oscillations (http://cnx.org/content/m58360/latest/) , the forces can
be modeled as in harmonic springs described by the Lennard-Jones potential. Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
(http://cnx.org/content/m58362/latest/#CNX_UPhysics_15_02_LennaJones) shows that such potentials are
asymmetricalinthatthepotentialenergyincreasesmoresteeplywhenthemoleculesgetclosertoeachotherthanwhenthey
getfartheraway.Thus,atagivenkineticenergy,thedistancemovedisgreaterwhenneighborsmoveawayfromeachother
thanwhentheymovetowardeach other.Theresult isthat increased kinetic energy(increased temperature) increases the
average distance between molecules—the substance expands.
Formostsubstancesunderordinaryconditions,itisanexcellentapproximationthatthereisnopreferreddirection(thatis,
thesolidis“isotropic”),andanincreaseintemperature increasesthesolid’ssizebyacertainfractionineachdimension.
Therefore, if the solid is free to expand or contract, its proportions stay the same; only its overall size changes.
Linear Thermal Expansion
According to experiments, the dependence of thermal expansion on temperature, substance, and original length is
summarized in the equation
dL (1.1)
=αL
dT
where ΔL isthechangeinlength L,ΔT isthechangeintemperature,and α isthecoefficientoflinearexpansion,
a material property that varies slightly with temperature. As α is nearly constant and also very small, for practical
purposes, we use the linear approximation:
ΔL=αLΔT. (1.2)
Table 1.2 lists representative values of the coefficient of linear expansion. As noted earlier, ΔT is the same whether it
isexpressedinunitsofdegreesCelsiusorkelvins;thus, α mayhaveunitsof 1/°C or1/Kwiththesamevalueineither
case. Approximating α as a constant is quite accurate for small changes in temperature and sufficient for most practical
purposes, even for large changes in temperature. We examine this approximation more closely in the next example.

14 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
Material Coefficient of Linear Coefficient of Volume
Expansion α(1/°C) Expansion β(1/°C)
Solids
Aluminum −6 −6
25×10 75×10
Brass −6 −6
19×10 56×10
Copper −6 −6
17×10 51×10
Gold −6 −6
14×10 42×10
Iron or steel −6 −6
12×10 35×10
Invar (nickel-iron alloy) −6 −6
0.9×10 2.7×10
Lead −6 −6
29×10 87×10
Silver −6 −6
18×10 54×10
Glass (ordinary) −6 −6
9×10 27×10
Glass (Pyrex®) −6 −6
3×10 9×10
Quartz −6 −6
0.4×10 1×10
Concrete, brick −6 −6
~12×10 ~36×10
Marble (average) −6 −6
2.5×10 7.5×10
Liquids
Ether −6
1650×10
Ethyl alcohol −6
1100×10
Gasoline −6
950×10
Glycerin −6
500×10
Mercury −6
180×10
Water −6
210×10
Gases
Air and most other gases at −6
3400×10
atmospheric pressure
Table 1.2Thermal Expansion Coefficients
Thermalexpansionisexploitedinthebimetallicstrip(Figure1.6).Thisdevicecanbeusedasathermometerifthecurving
stripisattachedtoapointeronascale.Itcanalsobeusedtoautomaticallycloseoropenaswitchatacertaintemperature,
as in older or analog thermostats.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 15
Figure 1.6 The curvature of a bimetallic strip depends on
temperature. (a) The strip is straight at the starting temperature,
where its two components have the same length. (b) At a higher
temperature, this strip bends to the right, because the metal on
the left has expanded more than the metal on the right. At a
lower temperature, the strip would bend to the left.
Example 1.2
Calculating Linear Thermal Expansion
The main span of San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge is 1275 m long at its coldest. The bridge is exposed to
temperaturesrangingfrom –15°C to 40°C.Whatisitschangeinlengthbetweenthesetemperatures?Assume
that the bridge is made entirely of steel.
Strategy
Use the equation for linear thermal expansion ΔL=αLΔT to calculate the change in length, ΔL. Use the
coefficient of linear expansion α for steel from Table 1.2, and note that the change in temperature ΔT is
55°C.
Solution
Substitute all of the known values into the equation to solve for ΔL:
⎛ −6⎞
ΔL=αLΔT = 12×10 (1275m)(55°C)=0.84m.
⎝ °C ⎠
Significance
Although not large compared with the length of the bridge, this change in length is observable. It is generally
spread over many expansion joints so that the expansion at each joint is small.
Thermal Expansion in Two and Three Dimensions
Unconstrainedobjectsexpandinalldimensions,asillustratedinFigure 1.7.Thatis,theirareasandvolumes,aswellas
theirlengths,increasewithtemperature.Becausetheproportionsstaythesame,holesandcontainervolumesalsogetlarger
withtemperature.Ifyoucutaholeinametalplate,theremainingmaterialwillexpandexactlyasitwouldifthepieceyou
removed were still in place. The piece would get bigger, so the hole must get bigger too.
Thermal Expansion in Two Dimensions
For small temperature changes, the change in area ΔA is given by
ΔA=2αAΔT (1.3)
where ΔA isthechangeinarea A, ΔT isthechangeintemperature,and α isthecoefficientoflinearexpansion,