# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 300-305
############################################################

292 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
nuclear model of the atom
heavy positively charged nucleus at the center is surrounded by electrons, proposed by
Rutherford
Paschen series spectral lines corresponding to electron transitions to/from the n=3 state
Pfund series spectral lines corresponding to electron transitions to/from the n=5 state
photocurrent in a circuit, current that flows when a photoelectrode is illuminated
photoelectric effect emission of electrons from a metal surface exposed to electromagnetic radiation of the proper
frequency
photoelectrode in a circuit, an electrode that emits photoelectrons
photoelectron electron emitted from a metal surface in the presence of incident radiation
photon particle of light
Planck’s hypothesis of energy quanta energyexchangesbetweentheradiationandthewallstakeplaceonlyinthe
form of discrete energy quanta
postulates of Bohr’s model three assumptions that set a frame for Bohr’s model
power intensity energy that passes through a unit surface per unit time
propagation vector vector with magnitude 2π/λ that has the direction of the photon’s linear momentum
quantized energies discrete energies; not continuous
quantum number index that enumerates energy levels
quantum phenomenon in interaction with matter, photon transfers either all its energy or nothing
quantum state of a Planck’s oscillator any mode of vibration of Planck’s oscillator, enumerated by quantum
number
reduced Planck’s constant Planck’s constant divided by 2π
Rutherford’s gold foil experiment first experiment to demonstrate the existence of the atomic nucleus
Rydberg constant for hydrogen physical constant in the Balmer formula
Rydberg formula experimentally found positions of spectral lines of hydrogen atom
scattering angle angle between the direction of the scattered beam and the direction of the incident beam
Stefan–Boltzmann constant physical constant in Stefan’s law
stopping potential in a circuit, potential difference that stops photocurrent
wave number magnitude of the propagation vector
wave quantum mechanics theory that explains the physics of atoms and subatomic particles
wave-particle duality particles can behave as waves and radiation can behave as particles
work function energy needed to detach photoelectron from the metal surface
α-particle doubly ionized helium atom
α-ray beam of α-particles (alpha-particles)
β-ray beam of electrons
γ-ray beam of highly energetic photons
KEY EQUATIONS
Wien’s displacement law λ max T =2.898×10 −3 m⋅K
Stefan’s law P(T)=σAT4
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 293
Planck’s constant h=6.626×10 −34 J⋅s=4.136×10 −15 eV⋅s
Energy quantum of radiation ΔE=hf
Planck’s blackbody radiation law
I(λ, T)=
2πhc2
1
λ5
e
hc/λkBT
−1
Maximum kinetic energy K max=eΔV
s
of a photoelectron
Energy of a photon E
f
=hf
Energy balance for photoelectron K max=hf −ϕ
Cut-off frequency ϕ
f c=
h
Relativistic invariant E2= p2c2+m2c4
energy equation 0
Energy-momentum relation E
f
for photon p f = c
Energy of a photon hc
E f =hf = λ
Magnitude of photon’s momentum h
p f = λ
Photon’s linear → →
momentum vector
p
f
=ℏ k
The Compton wavelength h
λ c= m c =0.00243nm
of an electron 0
The Compton shift Δλ=λ c(1−cosθ)
The Balmer formula ⎛ ⎞
1 =R 1 − 1
λ H⎝ 22 n2⎠
The Rydberg formula ⎛ ⎞
1 λ =R H ⎝ ⎜ n 1 2 f − n 1 i 2 ⎠ ⎟, n i=n f +1, n f +2, …
Bohr’s first quantization condition L n=nℏ, n=1, 2, …
Bohr’s second quantization condition hf =|E n−E m|
Bohr’s radius of hydrogen ℏ2
a =4πε =0.529Å
0 0 m e2
e
Bohr’s radius of thenth orbit r n=a
0
n2
Ground-state energy value, m e4
ionization limit E 0 = 8 1 ε2 h e 2 =13.6eV
0
E
th
l
e
ec
n
tr
th
o n
o
’s
rb
e
it
nergy in E n= −E
0 n
1
2
Ground state energy of E = −E = −13.6eV
1 0
hydrogen

294 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
T
hy
h
d
e
ro
n
g
th
e n
o
-
r
l
b
ik
it
e
o
i
f
on
r n= a
Z
0n2
T
of
h
h
e
y
n
d
t
r
h
o g
e
e
n
n
e
-
r
l
g
ik
y
e ion
E n= −Z2E
0 n
1
2
Energy of a matter wave E=hf
The de Broglie wavelength h
λ=
p
The frequency-wavelength relation λf = c
β
for matter waves
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle ΔxΔp≥ 1ℏ
2
SUMMARY
6.1Blackbody Radiation
• All bodies radiate energy. The amount of radiation a body emits depends on its temperature. The experimental
Wien’sdisplacementlawstatesthatthehotterthebody,theshorterthewavelengthcorrespondingtotheemission
peakintheradiationcurve.TheexperimentalStefan’slawstatesthatthetotalpowerofradiationemittedacrossthe
entirespectrumofwavelengthsatagiventemperatureisproportionaltothefourthpoweroftheKelvintemperature
of the radiating body.
• Absorption and emission of radiation are studied within the model of a blackbody. In the classical approach, the
exchangeofenergybetweenradiationandcavitywallsiscontinuous.Theclassicalapproachdoesnotexplainthe
blackbody radiation curve.
• Toexplaintheblackbodyradiationcurve,Planckassumedthattheexchangeofenergybetweenradiationandcavity
walls takes place only in discrete quanta of energy. Planck’s hypothesis of energy quanta led to the theoretical
Planck’sradiationlaw,whichagreeswiththeexperimentalblackbodyradiationcurve;italsoexplainsWien’sand
Stefan’s laws.
6.2Photoelectric Effect
• Thephotoelectriceffectoccurswhenphotoelectronsareejectedfromametalsurfaceinresponsetomonochromatic
radiation incident on the surface. It has three characteristics: (1) it is instantaneous, (2) it occurs only when the
radiationisaboveacut-offfrequency,and(3)kineticenergiesofphotoelectronsatthesurfacedonotdependofthe
intensity of radiation. The photoelectric effect cannot be explained by classical theory.
• We can explain the photoelectric effect by assuming that radiation consists of photons (particles of light). Each
photoncarriesaquantumofenergy.Theenergyofaphotondependsonlyonitsfrequency,whichisthefrequency
of the radiation. At the surface, the entire energy of a photon is transferred to one photoelectron.
• The maximum kinetic energy of a photoelectron at the metal surface is the difference between the energy of the
incident photon and the work function of the metal. The work function is the binding energy of electrons to the
metal surface. Each metal has its own characteristic work function.
6.3The Compton Effect
• IntheComptoneffect,X-raysscatteredoffsomematerialshavedifferentwavelengthsthanthewavelengthofthe
incident X-rays. This phenomenon does not have a classical explanation.
• The Compton effect is explained by assuming that radiation consists of photons that collide with weakly bound
electronsinthetargetmaterial.Bothelectronandphotonaretreatedasrelativisticparticles.Conservationlawsof
the total energy and of momentum are obeyed in collisions.
• Treating the photon as a particle with momentum that can be transferred to an electron leads to a theoretical
Compton shift that agrees with the wavelength shift measured in the experiment. This provides evidence that
radiation consists of photons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 295
• Compton scattering is an inelastic scattering, in which scattered radiation has a longer wavelength than that of
incident radiation.
6.4Bohr’s Model of the Hydrogen Atom
• Positions of absorption and emission lines in the spectrum of atomic hydrogen are given by the experimental
Rydberg formula. Classical physics cannot explain the spectrum of atomic hydrogen.
• The Bohr model of hydrogen was the first model of atomic structure to correctly explain the radiation spectra of
atomic hydrogen. It was preceded by the Rutherford nuclear model of the atom. In Rutherford’s model, an atom
consistsofapositivelychargedpoint-likenucleusthatcontainsalmosttheentiremassoftheatomandofnegative
electrons that are located far away from the nucleus.
• Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom is based on three postulates: (1) an electron moves around the nucleus in a
circular orbit, (2) an electron’s angular momentum in the orbit is quantized, and (3) the change in an electron’s
energyasitmakesaquantumjumpfromoneorbittoanotherisalwaysaccompaniedbytheemissionorabsorption
ofaphoton.Bohr’smodelissemi-classicalbecauseitcombinestheclassicalconceptofelectronorbit(postulate1)
with the new concept of quantization (postulates 2 and 3).
• Bohr’smodelofthehydrogenatomexplainstheemissionandabsorptionspectraofatomichydrogenandhydrogen-
likeionswithlowatomicnumbers.Itwasthefirstmodeltointroducetheconceptofaquantumnumbertodescribe
atomicstatesandtopostulatequantizationofelectronorbitsintheatom.Bohr’smodelisanimportantstepinthe
development of quantum mechanics, which deals with many-electron atoms.
6.5De Broglie’s Matter Waves
• DeBroglie’shypothesisofmatterwavespostulatesthatanyparticleofmatterthathaslinearmomentumisalsoa
wave.Thewavelengthofamatterwaveassociatedwithaparticleisinverselyproportionaltothemagnitudeofthe
particle’s linear momentum. The speed of the matter wave is the speed of the particle.
• DeBroglie’sconceptoftheelectronmatterwaveprovidesarationaleforthequantizationoftheelectron’sangular
momentum in Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom.
• IntheDavisson–Germerexperiment,electronsarescatteredoffacrystallinenickelsurface.Diffractionpatternsof
electron matter waves are observed. They are the evidence for the existence of matter waves. Matter waves are
observed in diffraction experiments with various particles.
6.6Wave-Particle Duality
• Wave-particledualityexistsinnature:Undersomeexperimentalconditions,aparticleactsasaparticle;underother
experimentalconditions,aparticleactsasawave.Conversely,undersomephysicalcircumstances,electromagnetic
radiation acts as a wave, and under other physical circumstances, radiation acts as a beam of photons.
• Modern-eradouble-slitexperimentswithelectronsdemonstratedconclusivelythatelectron-diffractionimagesare
formed because of the wave nature of electrons.
• The wave-particle dual nature of particles and of radiation has no classical explanation.
• Quantum theory takes the wave property to be the fundamental property of all particles. A particle is seen as
a moving wave packet. The wave nature of particles imposes a limitation on the simultaneous measurement of
the particle’s position and momentum. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle sets the limits on precision in such
simultaneous measurements.
• Wave-particledualityisexploitedinmanydevices,suchascharge-coupledevices(usedindigitalcameras)orinthe
electron microscopy of the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the transmission electron microscope (TEM).
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
whosetemperatureisincreasedfrom1000Kto1,000,000
6.1Blackbody Radiation K.
1. Whichsurfacehasahighertemperature–thesurfaceof
a yellow star or that of a red star? 3. Explain the color changes in a hot body as its
temperature is increased.
2. Describe what you would see when looking at a body

296 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
4. SpeculateastowhyUVlightcausessunburn,whereas
visible light does not. 6.3The Compton Effect
17. Discuss any similarities and differences between the
5. Twocavityradiatorsareconstructedwithwallsmadeof photoelectric and the Compton effects.
differentmetals.Atthesametemperature,howwouldtheir
radiation spectra differ?
18. Whichhasagreatermomentum:anUVphotonoran
IR photon?
6. Discuss why some bodies appear black, other bodies
appear red, and still other bodies appear white.
19. Doeschangingtheintensityofamonochromaticlight
beamaffectthemomentumoftheindividualphotonsinthe
7. Ifeverythingradiateselectromagneticenergy,whycan beam?Doessuchachangeaffectthenetmomentumofthe
we not see objects at room temperature in a dark room? beam?
8. How much does the power radiated by a blackbody 20. CantheComptoneffectoccurwithvisiblelight?Ifso,
increase when its temperature (in K) is tripled? will it be detectable?
21. Is it possible in the Compton experiment to observe
6.2Photoelectric Effect scattered X-rays that have a shorter wavelength than the
9. For the same monochromatic light source, would the incident X-ray radiation?
photoelectric effect occur for all metals?
22. ShowthattheComptonwavelengthhasthedimension
10. In the interpretation of the photoelectric effect, how of length.
isitknownthatanelectrondoesnotabsorbmorethanone
photon? 23. Atwhatscatteringangleisthewavelengthshiftinthe
Compton effect equal to the Compton wavelength?
11. Explain how you can determine the work function
fromaplotofthestoppingpotentialversusthefrequencyof
the incident radiation in a photoelectric effect experiment. 6.4Bohr’s Model of the Hydrogen Atom
CanyoudeterminethevalueofPlanck’sconstantfromthis
24. Explain why the patterns of bright emission spectral
plot?
lines have an identical spectral position to the pattern of
dark absorption spectral lines for a given gaseous element.
12. Suppose that in the photoelectric-effect experiment
we make a plot of the detected current versus the applied
25. Do the various spectral lines of the hydrogen atom
potential difference. What information do we obtain from
overlap?
suchaplot?CanwedeterminefromitthevalueofPlanck’s
constant? Can we determine the work function of the
26. TheBalmerseriesforhydrogenwasdiscoveredbefore
metal?
either the Lyman or the Paschen series. Why?
13. Speculate how increasing the temperature of a
27. When the absorption spectrum of hydrogen at room
photoelectrode affects the outcomes of the photoelectric
temperature is analyzed, absorption lines for the Lyman
effect experiment.
seriesarefound,butnonearefoundfortheBalmerseries.
What does this tell us about the energy state of most
14. Which aspects of the photoelectric effect cannot be
hydrogen atoms at room temperature?
explained by classical physics?
28. Hydrogen accounts for about 75% by mass of the
15. Isthephotoelectric effectaconsequenceofthewave
matter at the surfaces of most stars. However, the
characterofradiationorisitaconsequenceoftheparticle
absorption lines of hydrogen are strongest (of highest
character of radiation? Explain briefly.
intensity)inthespectraofstarswithasurfacetemperature
of about 9000 K. They are weaker in the sun spectrum
16. Themetalssodium,iron,andmolybdenumhavework and are essentially nonexistent in very hot (temperatures
functions 2.5 eV, 3.9 eV, and 4.2 eV, respectively. Which above 25,000 K) or rather cool (temperatures below 3500
of these metals will emit photoelectrons when illuminated K) stars. Speculate as to why surface temperature affects
with 400 nm light? the hydrogen absorption lines that we observe.
29. Discuss the similarities and differences between
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9