# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 150-156
############################################################

142 Chapter 3 | Interference
illuminated by a monochromatic light at λ=523nm. 74. Athinwedgefilledwithairisproducedwhentwoflat
What is the width of the central principal maximum on a glass plates are placed on top of one another and a slip of
screen 2.35 m away? paper is inserted between them at one edge. Interference
fringes are observed when monochromatic light falling
vertically on the plates are seen in reflection. Is the first
66. Eightslitsequallyseparatedby0.149mmisuniformly
fringeneartheedgewheretheplatesareincontactabright
illuminated by a monochromatic light at λ=523nm.
fringe or a dark fringe? Explain.
What is the intensity of a secondary maxima compared to
that of the principal maxima?
75. Twoidenticalpiecesofrectangularplateglassareused
to measure the thickness of a hair. The glass plates are
67. A transparent film of thickness 250 nm and index of
in direct contact at one edge and a single hair is placed
refractionof1.40issurroundedbyair.Whatwavelengthin
between them hear the opposite edge. When illuminated
abeamofwhitelightatnear-normalincidencetothefilm
with a sodium lamp (λ=589nm), the hair is seen
undergoes destructive interference when reflected?
between the 180th and 181st dark fringes. What are the
lower and upper limits on the hair’s diameter?
68. An intensity minimum is found for 450 nm light
transmitted through a transparent film (n=1.20) in air.
76. Twomicroscope slides made ofglassareilluminated
(a) What is minimum thickness of the film? (b) If this by monochromatic (λ=589nm) light incident
wavelengthisthelongestforwhichtheintensityminimum
perpendicularly. The top slide touches the bottom slide at
occurs,whatarethenextthreelowervaluesof λ forwhich
one end and rests on a thin copper wire at the other end,
this happens? formingawedgeofair.Thediameterofthecopperwireis
29.45µm.Howmanybrightfringesareseenacrossthese
69. Athinfilmwith n=1.32 issurroundedbyair.What
slides?
is the minimum thickness of this film such that the
reflection of normally incident light with λ=500nm is
77. A good quality camera “lens” is actually a system
minimized? of lenses, rather than a single lens, but a side effect is
that a reflection from the surface of one lens can bounce
70. Repeatyourcalculationofthepreviousproblemwith around many times within the system, creating artifacts
the thin film placed on a flat glass (n=1.50) surface. in the photograph. To counteract this problem, one of the
lenses in such a system is coated with a thin layer of
material(n=1.28)ononeside.Theindexofrefractionof
71. Afteraminoroilspill,athinkfilmofoil(n=1.40)
thelensglassis1.68.Whatisthesmallestthicknessofthe
ofthickness450nmfloatsonthewatersurfaceinabay.(a)
coatingthatreducesthereflectionat640nmbydestructive
Whatpredominantcolorisseenbyabirdflyingoverhead?
interference? (In other words, the coating’s effect is to be
(b) What predominant color is seen by a seal swimming
optimized for λ=640nm.)
underwater?
78. Constructive interference is observed from directly
72. A microscope slide 10 cm long is separated from a
aboveanoilslickforwavelengths(inair)440nmand616
glassplateatoneendbyasheetofpaper.Asshownbelow,
the other end of the slide is in contact with the plate. The
nm. The index ofrefraction ofthis oil is n=1.54.What
slide is illuminated from above by light from a sodium is the film’s minimum possible thickness?
lamp(λ=589nm),and14fringespercentimeterareseen
alongtheslide.Whatisthethicknessofthepieceofpaper? 79. A soap bubble is blown outdoors. What colors
(indicatebywavelengths)ofthereflectedsunlightareseen
enhanced?Thesoapbubblehasindexofrefraction1.36and
thickness 380 nm.
80. A Michelson interferometer with a He-Ne laser light
source(λ=632.8nm)projectsitsinterferencepatternon
a screen. If the movable mirror is caused to move by
8.54µm, how many fringes will be observed shifting
through a reference point on a screen?
73. Suppose that the setup of the preceding problem is
81. An experimenter detects 251 fringes when the
immersed in an unknown liquid. If 18 fringes per
movablemirrorinaMichelsoninterferometerisdisplaced.
centimeter arenowseenalongtheslide,whatistheindex
The light source used is a sodium lamp, wavelength 589
of refraction of the liquid?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 3 | Interference 143
nm. By what distance did the movable mirror move? micrometer is empty. Calculate the thickness of the foil?
82. A Michelson interferometer is used to measure the 86. The movable mirror of a Michelson interferometer
wavelength of light put through it. When the movable is attached to one end of a thin metal rod of length 23.3
mirror is moved by exactly 0.100 mm, the number of mm. The other end of the rod is anchored so it does not
fringes observed moving through is 316. What is the move.Asthetemperatureoftherodchangesfrom 15°C
wavelength of the light? to 25C, a change of 14 fringes is observed. The light
sourceisaHeNelaser, λ=632.8nm.Whatisthechange
83. A5.08-cm-longrectangularglasschamberisinserted
inlengthofthemetalbar,andwhatisitsthermalexpansion
intoonearmofaMichelsoninterferometerusinga633-nm
coefficient?
light source. This chamber is initially filled with air
(n=1.000293) at standard atmospheric pressure but the
87. In a thermally stabilized lab, a Michelson
air is gradually pumped out using a vacuum pump until interferometerisusedtomonitorthetemperaturetoensure
a near perfect vacuum is achieved. How many fringes are it stays constant. The movable mirror is mounted on the
observed moving by during the transition? endofa1.00-m-longaluminumrod,heldfixedattheother
end.ThelightsourceisaHeNelaser, λ=632.8nm.The
84. Into one arm of a Michelson interferometer, a plastic resolutionofthisapparatuscorrespondstothetemperature
sheetofthickness 75µm isinserted,whichcausesashift difference when a change of just one fringe is observed.
in the interference pattern by 86 fringes. The light source What is this temperature difference?
has wavelength of 610 nm in air. What is the index of
refraction of this plastic? 88. A65-fringeshiftresultsinaMichelsoninterferometer
when a 42.0-µm film made of an unknown material is
85. Thethicknessofanaluminumfoilismeasuredusing placed in one arm. The light source has wavelength 632.9
a Michelson interferometer that has its movable mirror nm. Identify the material using the indices of refraction
mounted on a micrometer. There is a difference of 27 found inTable 1.1.
fringes in the observed interference pattern when the
micrometerclampsdownonthefoilcomparedtowhenthe
CHALLENGE PROBLEMS
89. Determine what happens to the double-slit slide touches the bottom slide at one end and rests on a
interferencepatternifoneoftheslitsiscoveredwithathin, 0.100-mm-diameterhairattheotherend,formingawedge
transparentfilmwhosethicknessis λ/[2(n−1)],where λ of air. (a) How far apart are the dark bands, if the slides
are7.50cmlongand589-nmlightisused?(b)Isthereany
isthewavelengthoftheincidentlightandnistheindexof
differenceiftheslidesaremadefromcrownorflintglass?
refraction of the film.
Explain.
90. Fifty-one narrow slits are equally spaced and
93. Figure 3.14 shows two 7.50-cm-long glass slides
separated by 0.10 mm. The slits are illuminated by blue
illuminated by pure 589-nm wavelength light incident
light of wavelength 400 nm. What is angular position of
perpendicularly. The top slide touches the bottom slide at
the twenty-fifth secondary maximum? What is its peak
oneendandrestsonsomedebrisattheotherend,forming
intensity in comparison with that of the primary
a wedge of air. How thick is the debris, if the dark bands
maximum?
are 1.00 mm apart?
91. A film of oil on water will appear dark when it is
94. A soap bubble is 100 nm thick and illuminated by
verythin,becausethepathlengthdifferencebecomessmall
comparedwiththewavelengthoflightandthereisaphase white light incident at a 45° angle to its surface. What
shift at the top surface. If it becomes dark when the path wavelengthandcolorofvisiblelightismostconstructively
length difference is less than one-fourth the wavelength, reflected, assuming the same index of refraction as water?
what is the thickest the oil can be and appear dark at all
visiblewavelengths?Oilhasanindexofrefractionof1.40. 95. Anoilslickonwateris120nmthickandilluminated
bywhitelightincidentata 45° angletoitssurface.What
92. Figure 3.14 shows two glass slides illuminated by color does the oil appear (what is the most constructively
monochromatic light incident perpendicularly. The top reflected wavelength), given its index of refraction is 1.40?

144 Chapter 3 | Interference
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 145
4 | DIFFRACTION
Figure 4.1 A steel ball bearing illuminated by a laser does not cast a sharp, circular shadow. Instead, a series of diffraction
fringes and a central bright spot are observed. Known asPoisson’s spot, the effect was first predicted by Augustin-JeanFresnel
(1788–1827) as a consequence of diffraction of light waves. Based on principles of ray optics, Siméon-Denis Poisson
(1781–1840) argued against Fresnel’s prediction. (credit: modification of work by Harvard Natural Science Lecture
Demonstrations)
Chapter Outline
4.1Single-Slit Diffraction
4.2Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
4.3Double-Slit Diffraction
4.4Diffraction Gratings
4.5Circular Apertures and Resolution
4.6X-Ray Diffraction
4.7Holography
Introduction
Imaginepassingamonochromatic lightbeamthroughanarrowopening—aslitjustalittle widerthanthewavelength of
thelight.Insteadofasimpleshadowoftheslitonthescreen,youwillseethataninterferencepatternappears,eventhough
there is only one slit.
Inthechapteroninterference,wesawthatyouneedtwosourcesofwavesforinterferencetooccur.Howcantherebean
interferencepatternwhenwehaveonlyoneslit?InTheNatureofLight,welearnedthat,duetoHuygens’sprinciple,we
canimagineawavefrontasequivalenttoinfinitelymanypointsourcesofwaves.Thus,awavefromaslitcanbehavenotas
onewavebutasaninfinitenumberofpointsources.Thesewavescaninterferewitheachother,resultinginaninterference
pattern without the presence of a second slit. This phenomenon is calleddiffraction.
Another way to view this is to recognize that a slit has a small but finite width. In the preceding chapter, we implicitly
regardedslitsasobjectswithpositionsbutnosize.Thewidthsoftheslitswereconsiderednegligible.Whentheslitshave
finitewidths,eachpointalongtheopeningcanbeconsideredapointsourceoflight—afoundationofHuygens’sprinciple.
Becausereal-worldopticalinstrumentsmusthavefiniteapertures(otherwise,nolightcanenter),diffractionplaysamajor
roleinthewayweinterprettheoutputoftheseopticalinstruments.Forexample,diffractionplaceslimitsonourabilityto

146 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
resolve images or objects. This is a problem that we will study later in this chapter.
4.1 | Single-Slit Diffraction
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the phenomenon of diffraction and the conditions under which it is observed
• Describe diffraction through a single slit
After passing through a narrow aperture (opening), a wave propagating in a specific direction tends to spread out. For
example, sound waves that enter a room through an open door can be heard even if the listener is in a part of the room
wherethegeometryofraypropagationdictatesthatthereshouldonlybesilence.Similarly,oceanwavespassingthroughan
openinginabreakwatercanspreadthroughoutthebayinside.(Figure4.2).Thespreadingandbendingofsoundandocean
wavesaretwoexamplesofdiffraction,whichisthebendingofawavearoundtheedgesofanopeningoranobstacle—a
phenomenon exhibited by all types of waves.
Figure 4.2 Because of the diffraction of waves, ocean waves
entering through an opening in a breakwater can spread
throughout the bay. (credit: modification of map data from
Google Earth)
The diffraction of sound waves is apparent to us because wavelengths in the audible region are approximately the same
sizeastheobjects theyencounter,acondition thatmustbesatisfied ifdiffraction effectsaretobeobservedeasily.Since
thewavelengthsofvisiblelightrangefromapproximately390to770nm,mostobjectsdonotdiffractlightsignificantly.
However,situationsdooccurinwhichaperturesaresmallenoughthatthediffractionoflightisobservable.Forexample,
ifyouplaceyourmiddleandindexfingersclosetogetherandlookthroughtheopeningatalightbulb,youcanseearather
clear diffraction pattern, consisting of light and dark lines running parallel to your fingers.
Diffraction through a Single Slit
Light passing through a single slit forms a diffraction pattern somewhat different from those formed by double slits or
diffractiongratings,whichwediscussedinthechapteroninterference.Figure 4.3showsasingle-slitdiffractionpattern.
Notethatthecentralmaximumislargerthanmaximaoneithersideandthattheintensitydecreasesrapidlyoneitherside.
Incontrast,adiffractiongrating(DiffractionGratings)producesevenlyspacedlinesthatdimslowlyoneithersideofthe
center.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 147
Figure 4.3 Single-slit diffraction pattern. (a) Monochromatic
light passing through a single slit has a central maximum and
many smaller and dimmer maxima on either side. The central
maximum is six times higher than shown. (b) The diagram
shows the bright central maximum, and the dimmer and thinner
maxima on either side.
Theanalysisofsingle-slitdiffractionisillustratedinFigure4.4.Here,thelightarrivesattheslit,illuminatingituniformly
andisinphaseacrossitswidth.Wethenconsiderlightpropagatingonwardsfromdifferentpartsofthesameslit.According
toHuygens’sprinciple,everypartofthewavefrontintheslitemitswavelets,aswediscussedinThe Nature of Light.
These are like rays that start out in phase and head in all directions. (Each ray is perpendicular to the wave front of
a wavelet.) Assuming the screen is very far away compared with the size of the slit, rays heading toward a common
destination arenearlyparallel. Whentheytravelstraight ahead,asinpart(a)ofthefigure,theyremaininphase,andwe
observeacentralmaximum.However,whenraystravelatanangle θ relativetotheoriginaldirectionofthebeam,eachray
travelsadifferentdistancetoacommonlocation,andtheycanarriveinoroutofphase.Inpart(b),therayfromthebottom
travels a distance of one wavelength λ farther than the ray from the top. Thus, a ray from the center travels a distance
λ/2 lessthantheoneatthebottomedgeoftheslit,arrivesoutofphase,andinterferesdestructively.Arayfromslightly
abovethecenterandonefromslightlyabovethebottomalsocanceloneanother.Infact,eachrayfromtheslitinterferes
destructivelywithanotherray.Inotherwords,apair-wisecancellationofallraysresultsinadarkminimuminintensityat
thisangle.Bysymmetry,anotherminimumoccursatthesameangletotherightoftheincidentdirection(towardthebottom
of the figure) of the light.