# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 250-254
############################################################

238 5 • Chapter Review
fired. (c) Can you safely stand close behind one 5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
when it is fired?
16 . In completing the solution for a problem
5.6 Common Forces involving forces, what do we do after
constructing the free-body diagram? That is,
14 . A table is placed on a rug. Then a book is placed
what do we apply?
on the table. What does the floor exert a normal
force on? 17 . If a book is located on a table, how many forces
should be shown in a free-body diagram of the
15 . A particle is moving to the right. (a) Can the force
book? Describe them.
on it be acting to the left? If yes, what would
happen? (b) Can that force be acting downward? 18 . If the book in the previous question is in free fall,
If yes, why? how many forces should be shown in a free-
body diagram of the book? Describe them.
Problems
5.1 Forces act on an object. Find the
19 . Two ropes are attached to a tree, and forces of
third force that is needed to balance the first
and two forces.
are applied. The forces are coplanar (in the same
23 . While sliding a couch across a floor, Andrea and
plane). (a) What is the resultant (net force) of
these two force vectors? (b) Find the magnitude Jennifer exert forces and on the couch.
and direction of this net force. Andrea’s force is due north with a magnitude of
130.0 N and Jennifer’s force is east of north
20 . A telephone pole has three cables pulling as
with a magnitude of 180.0 N. (a) Find the net
shown from above, with
force in component form. (b) Find the magnitude
, , and and direction of the net force. (c) If Andrea and
. (a) Find the net force on the Jennifer’s housemates, David and Stephanie,
telephone pole in component form. (b) Find the disagree with the move and want to prevent its
magnitude and direction of this net force. relocation, with what combined force
should they push so that the couch does not
move?
5.3 Newton's Second Law
24 . Andrea, a 63.0-kg sprinter, starts a race with an
acceleration of . What is the net
external force on her?
25 . If the sprinter from the previous problem
accelerates at that rate for 20.00 m and then
maintains that velocity for the remainder of a
100.00-m dash, what will her time be for the
race?
21 . Two teenagers are pulling on ropes attached to a
26 . A cleaner pushes a 4.50-kg laundry cart in such
tree. The angle between the ropes is .
a way that the net external force on it is 60.0 N.
David pulls with a force of 400.0 N and
Calculate the magnitude of his cart’s
Stephanie pulls with a force of 300.0 N. (a) Find
acceleration.
the component form of the net force. (b) Find the
magnitude of the resultant (net) force on the 27 . Astronauts in orbit are apparently weightless.
tree and the angle it makes with David’s rope. This means that a clever method of measuring
the mass of astronauts is needed to monitor
5.2 Newton's First Law
their mass gains or losses, and adjust their diet.
One way to do this is to exert a known force on
22 . Two forces of and
an astronaut and measure the acceleration
Access for free at openstax.org

5 • Chapter Review 239
produced. Suppose a net external force of 50.0 the second exerts a force of 90.0 N, friction is
N is exerted, and an astronaut’s acceleration is 12.0 N, and the mass of the third child plus
measured to be . (a) Calculate her wagon is 23.0 kg. (a) What is the system of
mass. (b) By exerting a force on the astronaut, interest if the acceleration of the child in the
the vehicle in which she orbits experiences an wagon is to be calculated? (See the free-body
equal and opposite force. Use this knowledge to diagram.) (b) Calculate the acceleration. (c)
find equations for the acceleration of the What would the acceleration be if friction were
spaceship and for the apparent acceleration of 15.0 N?
the spaceship and for the apparent acceleration
that would be measured by an observer at rest
relative to the spaceship. (c) Discuss how this
would affect the measurement of the astronaut’s
acceleration. Propose a method by which recoil
of the vehicle is avoided.
28 . In Figure 5.12, the net external force on the
24-kg mower is given as 51 N. If the force of
friction opposing the motion is 24 N, what force
33 . A powerful motorcycle can produce an
F (in newtons) is the person exerting on the
acceleration of while traveling at 90.0
mower? Suppose the mower is moving at 1.5
km/h. At that speed, the forces resisting motion,
m/s when the force F is removed. How far will
including friction and air resistance, total 400.0
the mower go before stopping?
N. (Air resistance is analogous to air friction. It
29 . The rocket sled shown below accelerates opposite always opposes the motion of an object.) What is
to the motion at a rate of . What force is the magnitude of the force that motorcycle
necessary to produce this acceleration opposite to exerts backward on the ground to produce its
the motion? Assume that the rockets are off. The acceleration if the mass of the motorcycle with
mass of the system is kg. rider is 245 kg?
34 . A car with a mass of 1000.0 kg accelerates from
0 to 90.0 km/h in 10.0 s. (a) What is its
acceleration? (b) What is the net force on the
car?
35 . The driver in the previous problem applies the
brakes when the car is moving at 90.0 km/h, and
the car comes to rest after traveling 40.0 m.
30 . If the rocket sled shown in the previous problem
What is the net force on the car during its
starts with only one rocket burning, what is the
acceleration opposite to the motion?
magnitude of this acceleration? Assume that the
mass of the system is kg, the thrust 36 . An 80.0-kg passenger in an SUV traveling at
T is and the force of friction km/h is wearing a seat belt. The
opposing the motion is 650.0 N. (b) Why is the driver slams on the brakes and the SUV stops in
acceleration not one-fourth of what it is with all 45.0 m. Find the force of the seat belt on the
rockets burning? passenger.
31 . What is the acceleration opposite to the motion 37 . A particle of mass 2.0 kg is acted on by a single
of the rocket sled if it comes to rest in 1.10 s force (a) What is the particle’s
from a speed of 1000.0 km/h? (Such acceleration? (b) If the particle starts at rest,
acceleration opposite to the motion caused one how far does it travel in the first 5.0 s?
test subject to black out and have temporary
38 . Suppose that the particle of the previous
blindness.)
problem also experiences forces
32 . Suppose two children push horizontally, but in
and What is its acceleration in this
exactly opposite directions, on a third child in a
case?
wagon. The first child exerts a force of 75.0 N,

240 5 • Chapter Review
39 . Find the acceleration of the body of mass 5.0 kg upward by a 25.0 N vertical force. What is its
shown below. acceleration?
46 . A car weighing 12,500 N starts from rest and
accelerates to 83.0 km/h in 5.00 s. The friction
force is 1350 N. Find the applied force produced
by the engine.
47 . A body with a mass of 10.0 kg is assumed to be
in Earth’s gravitational field with .
What is the net force on the body if there are no
other external forces acting on the object?
48 . A firefighter has mass m; they hear the fire alarm
40 . In the following figure, the horizontal surface on
and slides down the pole with acceleration a
which this block slides is frictionless. If the two
(which is less than g in magnitude). (a) Write an
forces acting on it each have magnitude
equation giving the vertical force they must
and , what is the
apply to the pole. (b) If their mass is 90.0 kg and
magnitude of the resulting acceleration of the
they accelerate at what is the
block?
magnitude of their applied force?
49 . A baseball catcher is performing a stunt for a
television commercial. He will catch a baseball
(mass 145 g) dropped from a height of 60.0 m
above his glove. His glove stops the ball in
0.0100 s. What is the force exerted by his glove
5.4 Mass and Weight on the ball?
41 . The weight of an astronaut plus their space suit 50 . When the Moon is directly overhead at sunset,
on the Moon is only 250 N. (a) How much does the force by Earth on the Moon, , is
the suited astronaut weigh on Earth? (b) What is essentially at to the force by the Sun on the
the mass on the Moon? On Earth? Moon, , as shown below. Given that
and
42 . Suppose the mass of a fully loaded module in
all other forces on the
which astronauts take off from the Moon is
Moon are negligible, and the mass of the Moon is
kg. The thrust of its engines is
determine the magnitude of
N. (a) Calculate the module’s
the Moon’s acceleration.
magnitude of acceleration in a vertical takeoff
from the Moon. (b) Could it lift off from Earth? If
not, why not? If it could, calculate the magnitude
of its acceleration.
43 . A rocket sled accelerates at a rate of .
Its passenger has a mass of 75.0 kg. (a)
Calculate the horizontal component of the force
the seat exerts against his body. Compare this
with his weight using a ratio. (b) Calculate the
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
direction and magnitude of the total force the
seat exerts against his body. 51 . (a) What net external force is exerted on a
1100.0-kg artillery shell fired from a battleship if
44 . Repeat the previous problem for a situation in
the shell is accelerated at (b)
which the rocket sled accelerates opposite to
What is the magnitude of the force exerted on
the motion at a rate of . In this
the ship by the artillery shell, and why?
problem, the forces are exerted by the seat and
the seat belt. 52 . A rugby player is being pushed backward by an
opposing player who is exerting a force of 800.0
45 . A body of mass 2.00 kg is pushed straight
N on him. The mass of the losing player plus
Access for free at openstax.org

5 • Chapter Review 241
equipment is 90.0 kg, and he is accelerating the weight of the load that provides the tension.
backward at . (a) What is the force of Express answers in terms of the unknown
friction between the losing player’s feet and the masses and angle.
grass? (b) What force does the winning player
exert on the ground to move forward if his mass
plus equipment is 110.0 kg?
53 . A history book is lying on top of a physics book on a
desk, as shown below; a free-body diagram is also
shown. The history and physics books weigh 14 N
and 18 N, respectively. Identify each force on each
book with a double subscript notation (for instance,
the contact force of the history book pressing
against physics book can be described as ), and
determine the value of each of these forces,
explaining the process used.
56 . Suppose the shinbone in the preceding image
was a femur in a traction setup for a broken
bone, with pulleys and rope available. How
might we be able to increase the force along the
femur using the same weight?
57 . Two teams of nine members each engage in a
tug-of-war, pulling in opposite directions on a
horizontal rope. Each of the first team’s
members has an average mass of 68 kg and
exerts an average force of 1350 N horizontally
on the ground as they pull on the rope. Each of
the second team’s members has an average
mass of 73 kg and exerts an average force of
1365 N horizontally on the ground as they pull
on the rope in the opposite direction. (a) What is
the magnitude of the acceleration of the two
teams, and which team wins? (b) What is the
tension in the section of rope between the
54 . A truck collides with a car, and during the teams?
collision, the net force on each vehicle is
58 . What force does a trampoline have to apply to
essentially the force exerted by the other.
Jennifer, a 45.0-kg gymnast, to accelerate her
Suppose the mass of the car is 550 kg, the mass
of the truck is 2200 kg, and the magnitude of the straight up at ? The answer is
independent of the velocity of the gymnast—she
truck’s acceleration is . Find the
can be moving up or down or can be instantly
magnitude of the car’s acceleration.
stationary.
5.6 Common Forces
59 . (a) Calculate the tension in a vertical strand of
55 . A leg is suspended in a traction system, as spider web if a spider of mass
shown below. (a) Which pulley in the figure is hangs motionless on it. (b) Calculate the tension
used to calculate the force exerted on the foot? in a horizontal strand of spider web if the same
(b) What is the tension in the rope? Here is the spider sits motionless in the middle of it much
tension, is the weight of the leg, and is like the tightrope walker in Figure 5.26. The