# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 323-328
############################################################

CHAPTER 7
Work and Kinetic Energy
FIGURE 7.1 A sprinter exerts her maximum power with the greatest force in the short time her foot is in contact with the ground. This
adds to her kinetic energy, preventing her from slowing down during the race. Pushing back hard on the track generates a reaction force
that propels the sprinter forward to win at the finish. (credit: modification of work by Marie-Lan Nguyen)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
7.1 Work
7.2 Kinetic Energy
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
7.4 Power
INTRODUCTION In this chapter, we discuss some basic physical concepts involved in every physical motion in the
universe, going beyond the concepts of force and change in motion, which we discussed in Motion in Two and Three
Dimensions and Newton’s Laws of Motion. These concepts are work, kinetic energy, and power. We explain how
these quantities are related to one another, which will lead us to a fundamental relationship called the work-energy
theorem. In the next chapter, we generalize this idea to the broader principle of conservation of energy.
The application of Newton’s laws usually requires solving differential equations that relate the forces acting on an
object to the accelerations they produce. Often, an analytic solution is intractable or impossible, requiring lengthy
numerical solutions or simulations to get approximate results. In such situations, more general relations, like the
work-energy theorem (or the conservation of energy), can still provide useful answers to many questions and
require a more modest amount of mathematical calculation. In particular, you will see how the work-energy
theorem is useful in relating the speeds of a particle, at different points along its trajectory, to the forces acting on it,
even when the trajectory is otherwise too complicated to deal with. Thus, some aspects of motion can be addressed
with fewer equations and without vector decompositions.

312 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
7.1 Work
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Represent the work done by any force
• Evaluate the work done for various forces
In physics, work is done on an object when energy is transferred to the object. In other words, work is done when a
force acts on something that undergoes a displacement from one position to another. Forces can vary as a function
of position, and displacements can be along various paths between two points. We first define the increment of
work dW done by a force acting through an infinitesimal displacement as the dot product of these two vectors:
7.1
Then, we can add up the contributions for infinitesimal displacements, along a path between two positions, to get
the total work.
WORK DONE BY A FORCE
The work done by a force is the integral of the force with respect to displacement along the path of the
displacement:
7.2
The vectors involved in the definition of the work done by a force acting on a particle are illustrated in Figure 7.2.
While in general, Equation 7.2 requires mathematics beyond the scope of this text, in many simple situations this
integral becomes a familiar integral in one variable. We will examine several such examples and restrict our
discussion to these cases.
FIGURE 7.2 Vectors used to define work. The force acting on a particle and its infinitesimal displacement are shown at one point along the
path between A and B. The infinitesimal work is the dot product of these two vectors; the total work is the integral of the dot product along
the path.
We choose to express the dot product in terms of the magnitudes of the vectors and the cosine of the angle between
them, because the meaning of the dot product for work can be put into words more directly in terms of magnitudes
and angles. We could equally well have expressed the dot product in terms of the various components introduced in
Vectors. In two dimensions, these were the x- and y-components in Cartesian coordinates, or the r- and
-components in polar coordinates; in three dimensions, it was just x-, y-, and z-components. Which choice is more
convenient depends on the situation. In words, you can express Equation 7.1 for the work done by a force acting
over a displacement as a product of one component acting parallel to the other component. From the properties of
vectors, it doesn’t matter if you take the component of the force parallel to the displacement or the component of
the displacement parallel to the force—you get the same result either way.
Recall that the magnitude of a force times the cosine of the angle the force makes with a given direction is the
component of the force in the given direction. The components of a vector can be positive, negative, or zero,
depending on whether the angle between the vector and the component-direction is between and or and
, or is equal to . As a result, the work done by a force can be positive, negative, or zero, depending on
whether the force is generally in the direction of the displacement, generally opposite to the displacement, or
Access for free at openstax.org

7.1 • Work 313
perpendicular to the displacement. The maximum work is done by a given force when it is along the direction of the
displacement ( ), and zero work is done when the force is perpendicular to the displacement ( ).
The units of work are units of force multiplied by units of length, which in the SI system is newtons times meters,
This combination is called a joule, for historical reasons that we will mention later, and is abbreviated as J. In
the English system, still used in the United States, the unit of force is the pound (lb) and the unit of distance is the
foot (ft), so the unit of work is the foot-pound
Work Done by Constant Forces and Contact Forces
The simplest work to evaluate is that done by a force that is constant in magnitude and direction. In this case, we
can factor out the force; the remaining integral is just the total displacement, which only depends on the end points
A and B, but not on the path between them:
Figure 7.3(a) shows a person exerting a constant force along the handle of a lawn mower, which makes an angle
with the horizontal. The horizontal displacement of the lawn mower, over which the force acts, is The work done
on the lawn mower is , which the figure also illustrates as the horizontal component of the
force times the magnitude of the displacement.
FIGURE 7.3 Work done by a constant force. (a) A person pushes a lawn mower with a constant force. The component of the force parallel to
the displacement is the work done, as shown in the equation in the figure. (b) A person holds a briefcase. No work is done because the
displacement is zero. (c) The person in (b) walks horizontally while holding the briefcase. No work is done because is zero.

314 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
Figure 7.3(b) shows a person holding a briefcase. The person must exert an upward force, equal in magnitude to the
weight of the briefcase, but this force does no work, because the displacement over which it acts is zero.
In Figure 7.3(c), where the person in (b) is walking horizontally with constant speed, the work done by the person on
the briefcase is still zero, but now because the angle between the force exerted and the displacement is (
perpendicular to ) and .
EXAMPLE 7.1
Calculating the Work You Do to Push a Lawn Mower
How much work is done on the lawn mower by the person in Figure 7.3(a) if he exerts a constant force of 75.0 N at
an angle below the horizontal and pushes the mower 25.0 m on level ground?
Strategy
We can solve this problem by substituting the given values into the definition of work done on an object by a
constant force, stated in the equation . The force, angle, and displacement are given, so that only the
work W is unknown.
Solution
The equation for the work is
Substituting the known values gives
Significance
Even though one and a half kilojoules may seem like a lot of work, we will see in Potential Energy and Conservation
of Energy that it’s only about as much work as you could do by burning one sixth of a gram of fat.
When you mow the grass, other forces act on the lawn mower besides the force you exert—namely, the contact force
of the ground and the gravitational force of Earth. Let’s consider the work done by these forces in general. For an
object moving on a surface, the displacement is tangent to the surface. The part of the contact force on the
object that is perpendicular to the surface is the normal force Since the cosine of the angle between the normal
and the tangent to a surface is zero, we have
The normal force never does work under these circumstances. (Note that if the displacement did have a relative
component perpendicular to the surface, the object would either leave the surface or break through it, and there
would no longer be any normal contact force. However, if the object is more than a particle, and has an internal
structure, the normal contact force can do work on it, for example, by displacing it or deforming its shape. This will
be mentioned in the next chapter.)
The part of the contact force on the object that is parallel to the surface is friction, For this object sliding along the
surface, kinetic friction is opposite to relative to the surface, so the work done by kinetic friction is negative. If
the magnitude of is constant (as it would be if all the other forces on the object were constant), then the work
done by friction is
7.3
where is the path length on the surface. The force of static friction does no work in the reference frame
between two surfaces because there is never displacement between the surfaces. As an external force, static
Access for free at openstax.org

7.1 • Work 315
friction can do work. Static friction can keep someone from sliding off a sled when the sled is moving and perform
positive work on the person. If you’re driving your car at the speed limit on a straight, level stretch of highway, the
negative work done by air resistance is balanced by the positive work done by the static friction of the road on the
drive wheels. You can pull the rug out from under an object in such a way that it slides backward relative to the rug,
but forward relative to the floor. In this case, kinetic friction exerted by the rug on the object could be in the same
direction as the displacement of the object, relative to the floor, and do positive work. The bottom line is that you
need to analyze each particular case to determine the work done by the forces, whether positive, negative or zero.
EXAMPLE 7.2
Moving a Couch
You decide to move your couch to a new position on your horizontal living room floor. The normal force on the couch
is 1 kN and the coefficient of friction is 0.6. (a) You first push the couch 3 m parallel to a wall and then 1 m
perpendicular to the wall (A to B in Figure 7.4). How much work is done by the frictional force? (b) You don’t like the
new position, so you move the couch straight back to its original position (B to A in Figure 7.4). What was the total
work done against friction moving the couch away from its original position and back again?
FIGURE 7.4 Top view of paths for moving a couch.
Strategy
The magnitude of the force of kinetic friction on the couch is constant, equal to the coefficient of friction times the
normal force, . Therefore, the work done by it is , where d is the path length traversed. The
segments of the paths are the sides of a right triangle, so the path lengths are easily calculated. In part (b), you can
use the fact that the work done against a force is the negative of the work done by the force.
Solution
a. The work done by friction i
b. The length of the path along the hypotenuse is , so the total work done against friction is
Significance
The total path over which the work of friction was evaluated began and ended at the same point (it was a closed
path), so that the total displacement of the couch was zero. However, the total work was not zero. The reason is that
forces like friction are classified as nonconservative forces, or dissipative forces, as we discuss in the next chapter.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.1
Can kinetic friction ever be a constant force for all paths?
The other force on the lawn mower mentioned above was Earth’s gravitational force, or the weight of the mower.
Near the surface of Earth, the gravitational force on an object of mass m has a constant magnitude, mg, and
constant direction, vertically down. Therefore, the work done by gravity on an object is the dot product of its weight
and its displacement. In many cases, it is convenient to express the dot product for gravitational work in terms of
the x-, y-, and z-components of the vectors. A typical coordinate system has the x-axis horizontal and the y-axis
vertically up. Then the gravitational force is so the work done by gravity, over any path from A to B, is