# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 534-540
############################################################

526 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Example 11.7
Creating a New Particle
−
Themassoftheupsilon (ϒ) meson(bb)iscreatedinasymmetricelectron-positroncollider.Whatbeamenergy
is required?
Strategy
The Particle Data Group (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21particledata) has stated that the rest mass
energy of this meson is approximately 10.58 GeV. The above expression for the center-of-mass energy can
be simplified because a symmetric collider implies → p =− → p . Also, the rest masses of the colliding
1 2
electrons and positrons are identical(m
e
c2=0.511MeV ⎞
⎠
and much smaller than the mass of the energy
particlecreated.Thus,thecenter-of-massenergy(W)canbeexpressedcompletelyintermsofthebeamenergy,
E =E =E .
beam 1 2
Solution
Based on the above assumptions, we have
W2≈2⎡E E +E E ⎤=4E E =4E2.
⎣ 1 2 1 2⎦ 1 2 1
The beam energy is therefore
W
E ≈E = .
beam 1 2
The rest mass energy of the particle created in the collision is equal to the center-of-mass energy, so
E ≈ 10.58GeV =5.29GeV.
beam 2
Significance
Giventheenergyscaleofthisproblem,therestmassenergyoftheupsilon (ϒ) mesonisduealmostentirelydue
totheinitialkineticenergiesoftheelectronandpositrons.Thismesonishighlyunstableandquicklydecaysto
lighterandmorestableparticles.Theexistenceoftheupsilon (ϒ) particleappearsasadramaticincreaseofsuch
events at 5.29 GeV.
11.7 Check Your UnderstandingWhy is a symmetric collider “symmetric?”
Higherbeamenergiesrequirelargeraccelerators,somoderncollidingbeammachinesareverylarge.TheLHC,forexample,
is 17 miles in circumference (Figure 5.27). (In the 1940s, Enrico Fermi envisioned an accelerator that encircled all of
Earth!) An important scientific challenge of the twenty-first century is to reduce the size of particle accelerators.
Particle Detectors
The purpose of a particle detector is to accurately measure the outcome of collisions created by a particle accelerator.
Thedetectorsaremultipurpose.Inotherwords,thedetectorisdividedintomanysubdetectors,eachdesignedtomeasurea
differentaspectofthecollisionevent.Forexample,onedetectormightbedesignedtomeasurephotonsandanothermight
bedesignedtomeasuremuons.Toillustratehowsubdetectorscontributetoanunderstandingofanentirecollisionevent,
wedescribethesubdetectorsoftheCompactMuonSolenoid(CMS),whichwasusedtodiscovertheHiggsBosonatthe
LHC (Figure 11.9).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 527
Figure 11.9 Compact Muon Solenoid detector. The detector consists of several layers, each responsible for measuring different
types of particles. (credit: modification of work by David Barney/CERN)
The beam pipe of the detector is out of (and into) the page at the left. Particles produced by pp collisions (the “collision
fragments”) stream out of the detector in all directions. These particles encounter multiple layers of subdetectors. A
subdetectorisaparticledetectorwithinalargersystemofdetectorsdesignedtomeasurecertaintypesofparticles.Thereare
severalmaintypesofsubdetectors.Trackingdevicesdeterminethepathandthereforemomentumofaparticle;calorimeters
measure a particle’s energy; and particle-identification detectors determine a particle’s identity (mass).
Thefirstsetofsubdetectorsthatparticlesencounteristhesilicontrackingsystem.Thissystemisdesignedtomeasurethe
momentum of charged particles (such as electrons and protons). The detector is bathed in a uniform magnetic field, so
thechargedparticlesarebentinacircularpathbyaLorentzforce(asforthecyclotron).Ifthemomentumoftheparticle
is large, the radius of the trajectory is large, and the path is almost straight. But if the momentum is small, the radius of
thetrajectoryissmall,andthepathistightlycurved.Astheparticlespassthroughthedetector,theyinteractwithsilicon
microstripdetectorsatmultiplepoints.Thesedetectorsproducesmallelectrical signalsasthechargedparticlespassnear
the detector elements. The signals are then amplified and recorded. A series of electrical “hits” is used to determine the
trajectoryoftheparticleinthetrackingsystem.Acomputer-generated“bestfit”tothistrajectorygivesthetrackradiusand
thereforetheparticlemomentum.AttheLHC,alargenumberoftracksarerecordedforthesamecollisionevent.Fitstothe
tracks are shown by the blue and green lines inFigure 11.10.

528 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Figure 11.10 A three-dimensional view of particle fragments in
the LHC as seen by theATLAS detector. (credit: LHC/CERN)
Beyond the tracking layers is the electromagnetic calorimeter. This detector is made of clear, lead-based crystals. When
electrons interact with the crystals, they radiate high-energy photons. The photons interact with the crystal to produce
electron-positron pairs. Then, these particles radiate more photons. The process repeats, producing a particle shower (the
crystal “glows”). A crude model of this process is as follows.
Anelectronwithenergy E strikesthecrystalandloseshalfofitsenergyintheformofaphoton.Thephotonproducesan
0
electron-positronpair,andeachparticleproceedsawaywithhalftheenergyofthephoton.Meanwhile,theoriginalelectron
radiatesagain.So,weareleftwithfourparticles:twoelectrons,onepositron,andonephoton,eachwithanenergy E /4.
0
Thenumberofparticlesintheshowerincreasesgeometrically.Afternradiationevents,thereare N =2 n particles.Hence,
the total energy per particle afternradiation events is
E
E(t)=
n
0,
2
where E istheincidentenergyandE(t)istheamountofenergyperparticleafternevents.Anincomingphotontriggers
0
asimilarchainofevents(Figure11.11).Iftheenergyperparticledropsbelowaparticularthresholdvalue,othertypesof
radiativeprocessesbecomeimportantandtheparticleshowerceases.Eventually,thetotalenergyoftheincomingparticle
is absorbed and converted into an electrical signal.
Figure 11.11 (a) A particle shower produced in a crystal calorimeter. (b) A diagram showing a typical sequence of
reactions in a particle shower.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 529
Beyondthecrystalcalorimeteristhehadroncalorimeter.Asthenamesuggests,thissubdetectormeasureshadronssuchas
protonsandpions.Thehadroncalorimeterconsistsoflayersofbrassandsteelseparatedbyplasticscintillators.Itspurpose
istoabsorbtheparticleenergyandconvertitintoanelectronicsignal.Beyondthisdetectorisalargemagneticcoilusedto
produce a uniform field for tracking.
The last subdetector is the muon detector, which consists of slabs of iron that only muons (and neutrinos) can penetrate.
Betweentheironslabsaremultipletypesofmuon-trackingelementsthataccuratelymeasurethemomentumofthemuon.
The muon detectors are important because the Higgs boson (discussed soon) can be detected through its decays to four
muons—hence the name of the detector.
Oncedataiscollectedfromeachoftheparticlesubdetectors,theentirecollisioneventcanbeassessed.Theenergyofthe
ith particle is written
2
E i= (p i c)2+(m i c2) ,
where p is the absolute magnitude of the momentum of theith particle, and m is its rest mass.
i i
The total energy of all particles is therefore
E
total
=∑E i.
i
If all particles are detected, the total energy should be equal to the center-of-mass energy of the colliding beam machine
(W).Inpractice,notallparticlesareidentified,eitherbecausetheseparticlesaretoodifficulttodetect(neutrinos)orbecause
these particles “slip through.” In many cases, whole chains of decays can be “reconstructed,” like putting back together
awatchthathasbeensmashedtopieces.Informationaboutthesedecaychainsarecriticaltotheevaluationofmodelsof
particle interactions.
11.5 | The Standard Model
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the Standard Model in terms of the four fundamental forces and exchange particles
• Draw a Feynman diagram for a simple particle interaction
• Use Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle to determine the range of forces described by the
Standard Model
• Explain the rationale behind grand unification theories
The chief intellectual activity of any scientist is the development and revision of scientific models. A particle physicist
seekstodevelopmodelsofparticleinteractions.Thisworkbuildsdirectlyonworkdoneongravityandelectromagnetism
intheseventeenth,eighteenth,andnineteenthcenturies.Theultimategoalofphysicsisaunified“theoryofeverything”that
describesallparticleinteractionsintermsofasingleelegantequationandapicture.Theequationitselfmightbecomplex,
butmanyscientistssuspecttheideabehindtheequationwillmakeusexclaim:“Howcouldwehavemissedit?Itwasso
obvious!”
Inthissection,weintroducetheStandardModel,whichisthebestcurrentmodelofparticleinteractions.Wedescribethe
StandardModelindetailintermsofelectromagnetic,weaknuclear,andstrongforces.Attheendofthissection,wereview
unification theories in particle physics.
Introduction to the Standard Model
The Standard Model of particle interactions contains two ideas: electroweak theory and quantum chromodynamics
(QCD) (the force acting between color charges). Electroweak theory unifies the theory of quantum electrodynamics
(QED), the modern equivalent of classical electromagnetism, and the theory of weak nuclear interactions. The Standard
Model combines the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.
IntheStandardModel,particleinteractions occurthroughtheexchangeofbosons,the“forcecarriers.”Forexample,the
electrostatic forceiscommunicatedbetweentwopositivelychargedparticlesbysendingandreceivingmasslessphotons.

530 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Thiscanoccuratatheoreticalinfiniterange.TheresultoftheseinteractionsisCoulombrepulsion(orattraction).Similarly,
quarks bind together through the exchange of massless gluons. Leptons scatter off other leptons (or decay into lighter
particles)throughtheexchangeofmassiveWandZbosons.AsummaryofforcesasdescribedbytheStandardModelis
giveninTable11.6.Thegravitationalforce,mediatedbytheexchangeofmasslessgravitations,isaddedinthistablefor
completeness but is not part of the Standard Model.
Force Relative Exchange particle Particles acted Range
strength (bosons) upon
Strong 1 Gluon Quarks −15
10 m
Electromagnetic 1/137 photon Charged particles ∞
Weak 10 −10 W + , W−, Z bosons Quarks, leptons, 10 −18 m
neutrinos
Gravitational 10 −38 graviton All particles ∞
Table 11.6Four Forces and the Standard Model
The Standard Model can be expressed in terms of equations and diagrams. The equations are complex and are usually
coveredinamoreadvancedcourseinmodernphysics.However,theessenceoftheStandardModelcanbecapturedusing
Feynman diagrams. A Feynman diagram, invented by American physicist Richard Feynman (1918–1988), is a space-
time diagram that describes how particles move and interact. Different symbols are used for different particles. Particle
interactionsinonedimensionareshownasatime-positiongraph(notaposition-timegraph).Asanexample,considerthe
scatteringofanelectronandelectron-neutrino(Figure11.12).Theelectronmovestowardpositivevaluesofx(totheright)
and collides with an electron neutrino moving to the left. The electron exchanges a Z boson (charge zero). The electron
scatterstotheleftandtheneutrinoscatterstotheright.Thisexchangeisnotinstantaneous.TheZbosontravelsfromone
particletotheotheroverashortperiodoftime.Theinteractionoftheelectronandneutrinoissaidtooccurviatheweak
nuclearforce.Thisforcecannotbeexplainedbyclassicalelectromagnetismbecausethechargeoftheneutrinoiszero.The
weak nuclear force is discussed again later in this section.
Figure 11.12 In this Feynman diagram, the exchange of a
virtual Z 0 carries the weak nuclear force between an electron
and a neutrino.
Electromagnetic Force
According to QED, the electromagnetic force is transmitted between charged particles through the exchange of photons.
Thetheoryisbasedonthreebasicprocesses:Anelectrontravelsfromoneplacetothenext,emitsorabsorbsaphoton,and
travelsfromoneplacetoanotheragain.Whentwoelectronsinteract,oneelectronemitsthephotonandtheotherreceives
it(Figure 11.13).Photonstransferenergyandmomentumfromoneelectrontotheother.Thenetresultinthiscaseisa
repulsive force. The photons exchanged are virtual. A virtual particle is a particle that exists for too short a time to be
observable. Virtual photonsmayviolate thelawofconservation ofenergy.Toseethis,consider that ifthephotontransit
time Δt isextremelysmall,thenHeisenberg’suncertaintyprinciplestatesthattheuncertainlyinthephoton’senergy, ΔE,
may be very large.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 531
Figure 11.13 Feynman diagram of two electrons interacting
through the exchange of a photon.
To estimate the range of the electromagnetic interaction, assume that the uncertainty on the energy is comparable to the
energy of the photon itself, written
ΔE≈E. (11.4)
The Heisenberg uncertainly principle states that
h (11.5)
ΔE≈ .
Δt
Combining these equations, we have
h (11.6)
Δt≈ .
E
The energy of a photon is given by E=hf , so
Δt≈
h
h
f
≈ 1
f
= λ c. (11.7)
The distancedthat the photon can move in this time is therefore
⎛λ⎞ (11.8)
d =cΔt≈c
⎝c⎠
=λ.
The energy of the virtual photon can be arbitrarily small, so its wavelength can be arbitrarily large—in principle, even
infinitely large. The electromagnetic force is therefore a long-range force.
Weak Nuclear Force
Theweaknuclearforceisresponsibleforradioactivedecay.Therangeoftheweaknuclearforceisveryshort(onlyabout
10 −18 m)andliketheotherforcesintheStandardModel,theweakforcecanbedescribedintermsofparticleexchange.
(There is no simple function like the Coulomb force to describe these interactions.) The particle exchanged is one of
threebosons: W + , W−, and Z 0.TheStandardModelpredictstheexistenceofthesespin-1particlesandalsopredicts
their specific masses. In combination with previous experiments, the mass of the charged W bosons was predicted to be
81GeV/c2 andthatofthe Z 0 waspredicted tobe 90GeV/c2.ACERNexperiment discoveredparticles inthe1980s
with precisely these masses—an impressive victory for the model.
Theweaknuclearforceismostfrequentlyassociatedwithscatteringanddecaysofunstableparticlestolightparticles.For
example, neutrons decay to protons through the weak nuclear force. This reaction is written
n→p+e−+ν e,
wherenistheneutron,pisaproton, e− isanelectron,and ν
e
isanearlymasslesselectronneutrino.Thisprocess,called
betadecay,isimportantinmanyphysicalprocesses.AFeynmandiagramofbetadecayisgiveninFigure 11.14(a).The
neutronemitsa W− andbecomesaproton,thenthe W− producesanelectronandanantineutrino.Thisprocessissimilar
to the scattering event