# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 334-340
############################################################

322 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
moving with the person?
Strategy
Since speeds are given, we can use to calculate the person’s kinetic energy. However, in part (a), the person’s
speed is relative to the subway car (as given); in part (b), it is relative to the tracks; and in part (c), it is zero. If we
denote the car frame by C, the track frame by T, and the person by P, the relative velocities in part (b) are related by
We can assume that the central aisle and the tracks lie along the same line, but the direction the
person is walking relative to the car isn’t specified, so we will give an answer for each possibility, ,
as shown in Figure 7.10.
FIGURE 7.10 The possible motions of a person walking in a train are (a) toward the front of the car and (b) toward the back of the car.
Solution
a.
b. Therefore, the two possible values for kinetic energy relative to the track are
and
c. In a frame where as well.
Significance
You can see that the kinetic energy of an object can have very different values, depending on the frame of reference.
However, the kinetic energy of an object can never be negative, since it is the product of the mass and the square of
the speed, both of which are always positive or zero.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.6
You are rowing a boat parallel to the banks of a river. Your kinetic energy relative to the banks is less than your
kinetic energy relative to the water. Are you rowing with or against the current?
The kinetic energy of a particle is a single quantity, but the kinetic energy of a system of particles can sometimes be
divided into various types, depending on the system and its motion. For example, if all the particles in a system have
the same velocity, the system is undergoing translational motion and has translational kinetic energy. If an object is
rotating, it could have rotational kinetic energy, or if it’s vibrating, it could have vibrational kinetic energy. The kinetic
energy of a system, relative to an internal frame of reference, may be called internal kinetic energy. The kinetic
energy associated with random molecular motion may be called thermal energy. These names will be used in later
chapters of the book, when appropriate. Regardless of the name, every kind of kinetic energy is the same physical
quantity, representing energy associated with motion.
Access for free at openstax.org

7.3 • Work-Energy Theorem 323
EXAMPLE 7.8
Special Names for Kinetic Energy
(a) A player lobs a mid-court pass with a 624-g basketball, which covers 15 m in 2 s. What is the basketball’s
horizontal translational kinetic energy while in flight? (b) An average molecule of air, in the basketball in part (a), has
a mass of 29 u, and an average speed of 500 m/s, relative to the basketball. There are about molecules
inside it, moving in random directions, when the ball is properly inflated. What is the average translational kinetic
energy of the random motion of all the molecules inside, relative to the basketball? (c) How fast would the
basketball have to travel relative to the court, as in part (a), so as to have a kinetic energy equal to the amount in
part (b)?
Strategy
In part (a), first find the horizontal speed of the basketball and then use the definition of kinetic energy in terms of
mass and speed, . Then in part (b), convert unified units to kilograms and then use to get the
average translational kinetic energy of one molecule, relative to the basketball. Then multiply by the number of
molecules to get the total result. Finally, in part (c), we can substitute the amount of kinetic energy in part (b), and
the mass of the basketball in part (a), into the definition , and solve for v.
Solution
a. The horizontal speed is (15 m)/(2 s), so the horizontal kinetic energy of the basketball is
b. The average translational kinetic energy of a molecule is
and the total kinetic energy of all the molecules is
c.
Significance
In part (a), this kind of kinetic energy can be called the horizontal kinetic energy of an object (the basketball),
relative to its surroundings (the court). If the basketball were spinning, all parts of it would have not just the average
speed, but it would also have rotational kinetic energy. Part (b) reminds us that this kind of kinetic energy can be
called internal or thermal kinetic energy. Notice that this energy is about a hundred times the energy in part (a). How
to make use of thermal energy will be the subject of the chapters on thermodynamics. In part (c), since the energy in
part (b) is about 100 times that in part (a), the speed should be about 10 times as big, which it is (76 compared to
7.5 m/s).
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply the work-energy theorem to find information about the motion of a particle, given the forces acting
on it
• Use the work-energy theorem to find information about the forces acting on a particle, given information
about its motion
We have discussed how to find the work done on a particle by the forces that act on it, but how is that work
manifested in the motion of the particle? According to Newton’s second law of motion, the sum of all the forces
acting on a particle, or the net force, determines the rate of change in the momentum of the particle, or its motion.
Therefore, we should consider the work done by all the forces acting on a particle, or the net work, to see what

324 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
effect it has on the particle’s motion.
Let’s start by looking at the net work done on a particle as it moves over an infinitesimal displacement, which is the
dot product of the net force and the displacement: Newton’s second law tells us that
so For the mathematical functions describing the motion of a physical
particle, we can rearrange the differentials dt, etc., as algebraic quantities in this expression, that is,
where we substituted the velocity for the time derivative of the displacement and used the commutative property of
the dot product [Equation 2.30]. Since derivatives and integrals of scalars are probably more familiar to you at this
point, we express the dot product in terms of Cartesian coordinates before we integrate between any two points A
and B on the particle’s trajectory. This gives us the net work done on the particle:
7.8
In the middle step, we used the fact that the square of the velocity is the sum of the squares of its Cartesian
components, and in the last step, we used the definition of the particle’s kinetic energy. This important result is
called the work-energy theorem (Figure 7.11).
WORK-ENERGY THEOREM
The net work done on a particle equals the change in the particle’s kinetic energy:
7.9
FIGURE 7.11 Horse pulls are common events at state fairs. The work done by the horses pulling on the load results in a change in kinetic
energy of the load, ultimately going faster. (credit: modification of work by “Jassen”/ Flickr)
According to this theorem, when an object slows down, its final kinetic energy is less than its initial kinetic energy,
the change in its kinetic energy is negative, and so is the net work done on it. If an object speeds up, the net work
done on it is positive. When calculating the net work, you must include all the forces that act on an object. If you
leave out any forces that act on an object, or if you include any forces that don’t act on it, you will get a wrong result.
The importance of the work-energy theorem, and the further generalizations to which it leads, is that it makes some
types of calculations much simpler to accomplish than they would be by trying to solve Newton’s second law. For
example, in Newton’s Laws of Motion, we found the speed of an object sliding down a frictionless plane by solving
Access for free at openstax.org

7.3 • Work-Energy Theorem 325
Newton’s second law for the acceleration and using kinematic equations for constant acceleration, obtaining
where s is the displacement down the plane.
We can also get this result from the work-energy theorem in Equation 7.1. Since only two forces are acting on the
object-gravity and the normal force-and the normal force doesn't do any work, the net work is just the work done by
gravity. The work dW is the dot product of the force of gravity or and the displacement .
After taking the dot product and integrating from an initial position to a final position , one finds the net work
as
where y is positive up. The work-energy theorem says that this equals the change in kinetic energy:
Using a right triangle, we can see that so the result for the final speed is the same.
What is gained by using the work-energy theorem? The answer is that for a frictionless plane surface, not much.
However, Newton’s second law is easy to solve only for this particular case, whereas the work-energy theorem gives
the final speed for any shaped frictionless surface. For an arbitrary curved surface, the normal force is not constant,
and Newton’s second law may be difficult or impossible to solve analytically. Constant or not, for motion along a
surface, the normal force never does any work, because it’s perpendicular to the displacement. A calculation using
the work-energy theorem avoids this difficulty and applies to more general situations.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Work-Energy Theorem
1. Draw a free-body diagram for each force on the object.
2. Determine whether or not each force does work over the displacement in the diagram. Be sure to keep any
positive or negative signs in the work done.
3. Add up the total amount of work done by each force.
4. Set this total work equal to the change in kinetic energy and solve for any unknown parameter.
5. Check your answers. If the object is traveling at a constant speed or zero acceleration, the total work done
should be zero and match the change in kinetic energy. If the total work is positive, the object must have sped
up or increased kinetic energy. If the total work is negative, the object must have slowed down or decreased
kinetic energy.
EXAMPLE 7.9
Loop-the-Loop
The frictionless track for a toy car includes a loop-the-loop of radius R. How high, measured from the bottom of the
loop, must the car be placed to start from rest on the approaching section of track and go all the way around the
loop?

326 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
FIGURE 7.12 A frictionless track for a toy car has a loop-the-loop in it. How high must the car start so that it can go around the loop without
falling off?
Strategy
The free-body diagram at the final position of the object is drawn in Figure 7.12. The gravitational work is the only
work done over the displacement that is not zero. Since the weight points in the same direction as the net vertical
displacement, the total work done by the gravitational force is positive. From the work-energy theorem, the starting
height determines the speed of the car at the top of the loop,
where the notation is shown in the accompanying figure. At the top of the loop, the normal force and gravity are both
down and the acceleration is centripetal, so
The condition for maintaining contact with the track is that there must be some normal force, however slight; that is,
. Substituting for and N, we can find the condition for .
Solution
Implement the steps in the strategy to arrive at the desired result:
Significance
On the surface of the loop, the normal component of gravity and the normal contact force must provide the
centripetal acceleration of the car going around the loop. The tangential component of gravity slows down or speeds
up the car. A child would find out how high to start the car by trial and error, but now that you know the work-energy
theorem, you can predict the minimum height (as well as other more useful results) from physical principles. By
using the work-energy theorem, you did not have to solve a differential equation to determine the height.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.7
Suppose the radius of the loop-the-loop in Example 7.9 is 15 cm and the toy car starts from rest at a height of 45 cm
above the bottom. What is its speed at the top of the loop?
INTERACTIVE
Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/21rollcoas) to see a looping rollercoaster.
In situations where the motion of an object is known, but the values of one or more of the forces acting on it are not
known, you may be able to use the work-energy theorem to get some information about the forces. Work depends
Access for free at openstax.org

7.3 • Work-Energy Theorem 327
on the force and the distance over which it acts, so the information is provided via their product.
EXAMPLE 7.10
Determining a Stopping Force
A bullet has a mass of 40 grains (2.60 g) and a muzzle velocity of 1100 ft./s (335 m/s). It can penetrate eight 1-inch
pine boards, each with thickness 0.75 inches. What is the average stopping force exerted by the wood, as shown in
Figure 7.13?
FIGURE 7.13 The boards exert a force to stop the bullet. As a result, the boards do work and the bullet loses kinetic energy.
Strategy
We can assume that under the general conditions stated, the bullet loses all its kinetic energy penetrating the
boards, so the work-energy theorem says its initial kinetic energy is equal to the average stopping force times the
distance penetrated. The change in the bullet’s kinetic energy and the net work done stopping it are both negative,
so when you write out the work-energy theorem, with the net work equal to the average force times the stopping
distance, that’s what you get. The total thickness of eight 1-inch pine boards that the bullet penetrates is
Solution
Applying the work-energy theorem, we get
so
Significance
We could have used Newton’s second law and kinematics in this example, but the work-energy theorem also
supplies an answer to less simple situations. The penetration of a bullet, fired vertically upward into a block of wood,
is discussed in one section of Asif Shakur’s recent article [“Bullet-Block Science Video Puzzle.” The Physics Teacher
(January 2015) 53(1): 15-16]. If the bullet is fired dead center into the block, it loses all its kinetic energy and
penetrates slightly farther than if fired off-center. The reason is that if the bullet hits off-center, it has a little kinetic
energy after it stops penetrating, because the block rotates. The work-energy theorem implies that a smaller change
in kinetic energy results in a smaller penetration. You will understand more of the physics in this interesting article
after you finish reading Angular Momentum.
INTERACTIVE
Learn more about work and energy in this PhET simulation (https://openstax.org/l/21ramp) called “the ramp.” Try
changing the force pushing the box and the frictional force along the incline. The work and energy plots can be
examined to note the total work done and change in kinetic energy of the box.