# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 791-799
############################################################

16.5 • Interference of Waves 779
FIGURE 16.22 When two linear waves in the same medium interfere, the height of resulting wave is the sum of the heights of the individual
waves, taken point by point. This plot shows two waves (red and blue) added together, along with the resulting wave (black). These graphs
represent the height of the wave at each point. The waves may be any linear wave, including ripples on a pond, disturbances on a string,
sound, or electromagnetic waves.
The superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference, and can vary
from place to place and time to time. Sound from a stereo, for example, can be loud in one spot and quiet in another.
Varying loudness means the sound waves add partially constructively and partially destructively at different
locations. A stereo has at least two speakers creating sound waves, and waves can reflect from walls. All these
waves interfere, and the resulting wave is the superposition of the waves.
We have shown several examples of the superposition of waves that are similar. Figure 16.23 illustrates an example
of the superposition of two dissimilar waves. Here again, the disturbances add, producing a resultant wave.
FIGURE 16.23 Superposition of nonidentical waves exhibits both constructive and destructive interference.

780 16 • Waves
At times, when two or more mechanical waves interfere, the pattern produced by the resulting wave can be rich in
complexity, some without any readily discernable patterns. For example, plotting the sound wave of your favorite
music can look quite complex and is the superposition of the individual sound waves from many instruments; it is
the complexity that makes the music interesting and worth listening to. At other times, waves can interfere and
produce interesting phenomena, which are complex in their appearance and yet beautiful in simplicity of the
physical principle of superposition, which formed the resulting wave. One example is the phenomenon known as
standing waves, produced by two identical waves moving in different directions. We will look more closely at this
phenomenon in the next section.
INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation (https://openstax.org/l/21waveinterfer) to make waves with a dripping faucet, audio
speaker, or laser! Add a second source or a pair of slits to create an interference pattern. You can observe one
source or two sources. Using two sources, you can observe the interference patterns that result from varying the
frequencies and the amplitudes of the sources.
Superposition of Sinusoidal Waves that Differ by a Phase Shift
Many examples in physics consist of two sinusoidal waves that are identical in amplitude, wave number, and angular
frequency, but differ by a phase shift:
When these two waves exist in the same medium, the resultant wave resulting from the superposition of the two
individual waves is the sum of the two individual waves:
The resultant wave can be better understood by using the trigonometric identity:
where and . The resulting wave becomes
This equation is usually written as
16.13
The resultant wave has the same wave number and angular frequency, an amplitude of and
a phase shift equal to half the original phase shift. Examples of waves that differ only in a phase shift are shown in
Figure 16.24. The red and blue waves each have the same amplitude, wave number, and angular frequency, and
differ only in a phase shift. They therefore have the same period, wavelength, and frequency. The green wave is the
result of the superposition of the two waves. When the two waves have a phase difference of zero, the waves are in
phase, and the resultant wave has the same wave number and angular frequency, and an amplitude equal to twice
the individual amplitudes (part (a)). This is constructive interference. If the phase difference is the waves
interfere in destructive interference (part (c)). The resultant wave has an amplitude of zero. Any other phase
difference results in a wave with the same wave number and angular frequency as the two incident waves but with a
phase shift of and an amplitude equal to Examples are shown in parts (b) and (d).
Access for free at openstax.org

16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 781
FIGURE 16.24 Superposition of two waves with identical amplitudes, wavelengths, and frequency, but that differ in a phase shift. The red
wave is defined by the wave function and the blue wave is defined by the wave function
. The black line shows the result of adding the two waves. The phase difference between the two waves are
(a) (b) (c) and (d) .
16.6 Standing Waves and Resonance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe standing waves and explain how they are produced
• Describe the modes of a standing wave on a string
• Provide examples of standing waves beyond the waves on a string
Throughout this chapter, we have been studying traveling waves, or waves that transport energy from one place to
another. Under certain conditions, waves can bounce back and forth through a particular region, effectively
becoming stationary. These are called standing waves.
Another related effect is known as resonance. In Oscillations, we defined resonance as a phenomenon in which a
small-amplitude driving force could produce large-amplitude motion. Think of a child on a swing, which can be
modeled as a physical pendulum. Relatively small-amplitude pushes by a parent can produce large-amplitude
swings. Sometimes this resonance is good—for example, when producing music with a stringed instrument. At other
times, the effects can be devastating, such as the collapse of a building during an earthquake. In the case of
standing waves, the relatively large amplitude standing waves are produced by the superposition of smaller
amplitude component waves.

782 16 • Waves
Standing Waves
Sometimes waves do not seem to move; rather, they just vibrate in place. You can see unmoving waves on the
surface of a glass of milk in a refrigerator, for example. Vibrations from the refrigerator motor create waves on the
milk that oscillate up and down but do not seem to move across the surface. Figure 16.25 shows an experiment you
can try at home. Take a bowl of milk and place it on a common box fan. Vibrations from the fan will produce circular
standing waves in the milk. The waves are visible in the photo due to the reflection from a lamp. These waves are
formed by the superposition of two or more traveling waves, such as illustrated in Figure 16.26 for two identical
waves moving in opposite directions. The waves move through each other with their disturbances adding as they go
by. If the two waves have the same amplitude and wavelength, then they alternate between constructive and
destructive interference. The resultant looks like a wave standing in place and, thus, is called a standing wave.
FIGURE 16.25 Standing waves are formed on the surface of a bowl of milk sitting on a box fan. The vibrations from the fan causes the
surface of the milk to oscillate. The waves are visible due to the reflection of light from a lamp. (credit: David Chelton)
Access for free at openstax.org

16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 783
FIGURE 16.26 Time snapshots of two sine waves. The red wave is moving in the −x-direction and the blue wave is moving in the
+x-direction. The resulting wave is shown in black. Consider the resultant wave at the points and notice
that the resultant wave always equals zero at these points, no matter what the time is. These points are known as fixed points (nodes). In
between each two nodes is an antinode, a place where the medium oscillates with an amplitude equal to the sum of the amplitudes of the
individual waves.
Consider two identical waves that move in opposite directions. The first wave has a wave function of
and the second wave has a wave function . The waves
interfere and form a resultant wave

784 16 • Waves
This can be simplified using the trigonometric identity
where and , giving us
which simplifies to
16.14
Notice that the resultant wave is a sine wave that is a function only of position, multiplied by a cosine function that is
a function only of time. Graphs of y(x,t) as a function of x for various times are shown in Figure 16.26. The red wave
moves in the negative x-direction, the blue wave moves in the positive x-direction, and the black wave is the sum of
the two waves. As the red and blue waves move through each other, they move in and out of constructive
interference and destructive interference.
Initially, at time the two waves are in phase, and the result is a wave that is twice the amplitude of the
individual waves. The waves are also in phase at the time In fact, the waves are in phase at any integer
multiple of half of a period:
At other times, the two waves are out of phase, and the resulting wave is equal to zero. This
happens at
Notice that some x-positions of the resultant wave are always zero no matter what the phase relationship is. These
positions are called nodes. Where do the nodes occur? Consider the solution to the sum of the two waves
Finding the positions where the sine function equals zero provides the positions of the nodes.
There are also positions where y oscillates between . These are the antinodes. We can find them by
considering which values of x result in .
What results is a standing wave as shown in Figure 16.27, which shows snapshots of the resulting wave of two
identical waves moving in opposite directions. The resulting wave appears to be a sine wave with nodes at integer
multiples of half wavelengths. The antinodes oscillate between due to the cosine term, , which
oscillates between .
The resultant wave appears to be standing still, with no apparent movement in the x-direction, although it is
Access for free at openstax.org

16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 785
composed of one wave function moving in the positive, whereas the second wave is moving in the negative
x-direction. Figure 16.27 shows various snapshots of the resulting wave. The nodes are marked with red dots while
the antinodes are marked with blue dots.
FIGURE 16.27 When two identical waves are moving in opposite directions, the resultant wave is a standing wave. Nodes appear at integer
multiples of half wavelengths. Antinodes appear at odd multiples of quarter wavelengths, where they oscillate between The nodes
are marked with red dots and the antinodes are marked with blue dots.
A common example of standing waves are the waves produced by stringed musical instruments. When the string is
plucked, pulses travel along the string in opposite directions. The ends of the strings are fixed in place, so nodes
appear at the ends of the strings—the boundary conditions of the system, regulating the resonant frequencies in the
strings. The resonance produced on a string instrument can be modeled in a physics lab using the apparatus shown
in Figure 16.28.
FIGURE 16.28 A lab setup for creating standing waves on a string. The string has a node on each end and a constant linear density. The
length between the fixed boundary conditions is L. The hanging mass provides the tension in the string, and the speed of the waves on the
string is proportional to the square root of the tension divided by the linear mass density.
The lab setup shows a string attached to a string vibrator, which oscillates the string with an adjustable frequency f.
The other end of the string passes over a frictionless pulley and is tied to a hanging mass. The magnitude of the
tension in the string is equal to the weight of the hanging mass. The string has a constant linear density (mass per
length) and the speed at which a wave travels down the string equals Equation 16.7. The
symmetrical boundary conditions (a node at each end) dictate the possible frequencies that can excite standing
waves. Starting from a frequency of zero and slowly increasing the frequency, the first mode appears as
shown in Figure 16.29. The first mode, also called the fundamental mode or the first harmonic, shows half of a
wavelength has formed, so the wavelength is equal to twice the length between the nodes . The
fundamental frequency, or first harmonic frequency, that drives this mode is
where the speed of the wave is Keeping the tension constant and increasing the frequency leads to the
second harmonic or the mode. This mode is a full wavelength and the frequency is twice the

786 16 • Waves
fundamental frequency:
FIGURE 16.29 Standing waves created on a string of length L. A node occurs at each end of the string. The nodes are boundary conditions
that limit the possible frequencies that excite standing waves. (Note that the amplitudes of the oscillations have been kept constant for
visualization. The standing wave patterns possible on the string are known as the normal modes. Conducting this experiment in the lab
would result in a decrease in amplitude as the frequency increases.)
The next two modes, or the third and fourth harmonics, have wavelengths of and driven by
frequencies of and All frequencies above the frequency are known as the
overtones. The equations for the wavelength and the frequency can be summarized as:
16.15
16.16
The standing wave patterns that are possible for a string, the first four of which are shown in Figure 16.29, are
known as the normal modes, with frequencies known as the normal frequencies. In summary, the first frequency to
produce a normal mode is called the fundamental frequency (or first harmonic). Any frequencies above the
fundamental frequency are overtones. The second frequency of the normal mode of the string is the first
overtone (or second harmonic). The frequency of the normal mode is the second overtone (or third harmonic)
and so on.
The solutions shown as Equation 16.15 and Equation 16.16 are for a string with the boundary condition of a node on
each end. When the boundary condition on either side is the same, the system is said to have symmetric boundary
conditions. Equation 16.15 and Equation 16.16 are good for any symmetric boundary conditions, that is, nodes at
both ends or antinodes at both ends.
EXAMPLE 16.7
Standing Waves on a String
Consider a string of attached to an adjustable-frequency string vibrator as shown in Figure 16.30. The
waves produced by the vibrator travel down the string and are reflected by the fixed boundary condition at the
pulley. The string, which has a linear mass density of is passed over a frictionless pulley of a
Access for free at openstax.org