# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 378-382
############################################################

366 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
generate electricity (Figure 8.15). However, in another important physical process, known as the photoelectric
effect, energetic radiation impinging on certain materials is directly converted into electricity. Materials that do this
are called photovoltaics (PV in Figure 8.14). Some solar power systems use lenses or mirrors to concentrate the
Sun’s rays, before converting their energy through photovoltaics, and these are qualified as CSP in Figure 8.14.
FIGURE 8.15 Solar cell arrays found in a sunny area converting the solar energy into stored electrical energy. (credit: modification of work
by Sarah Swenty, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
As we finish this chapter on energy and work, it is relevant to draw some distinctions between two sometimes
misunderstood terms in the area of energy use. As we mentioned earlier, the “law of conservation of energy” is a
very useful principle in analyzing physical processes. It cannot be proven from basic principles but is a very good
bookkeeping device, and no exceptions have ever been found. It states that the total amount of energy in an isolated
system always remains constant. Related to this principle, but remarkably different from it, is the important
philosophy of energy conservation. This concept has to do with seeking to decrease the amount of energy used by
an individual or group through reducing activities (e.g., turning down thermostats, driving fewer kilometers) and/or
increasing conversion efficiencies in the performance of a particular task, such as developing and using more
efficient room heaters, cars that have greater miles-per-gallon ratings, energy-efficient compact fluorescent lights,
etc.
Since energy in an isolated system is not destroyed, created, or generated, you might wonder why we need to be
concerned about our energy resources, since energy is a conserved quantity. The problem is that the final result of
most energy transformations is waste heat, that is, work that has been “degraded” in the energy transformation. We
will discuss this idea in more detail in the chapters on thermodynamics.
Access for free at openstax.org

8 • Chapter Review 367
Chapter Review
Key Terms
conservative force force that does work independent non-conservative force force that does work that
of path depends on path
conserved quantity one that cannot be created or non-renewable energy source that is not renewable,
destroyed, but may be transformed between but is depleted by human consumption
different forms of itself potential energy function of position, energy
energy conservation total energy of an isolated possessed by an object relative to the system
system is constant considered
equilibrium point position where the assumed potential energy diagram graph of a particle’s
conservative, net force on a particle, given by the potential energy as a function of position
slope of its potential energy curve, is zero potential energy difference negative of the work
exact differential is the total differential of a function done acting between two points in space
and requires the use of partial derivatives if the renewable energy source that is replenished by
function involves more than one dimension natural processes, over human time scales
mechanical energy sum of the kinetic and potential turning point position where the velocity of a
energies particle, in one-dimensional motion, changes sign
Key Equations
Difference of potential energy
Potential energy with respect to zero of
potential energy at
Gravitational potential energy near Earth’s surface
Potential energy for an ideal spring
Work done by conservative force over a closed path
Condition for conservative force in two dimensions
Conservative force is the negative derivative of potential energy
Conservation of energy with no
non-conservative forces
Summary
8.1 Potential Energy of a System is conservative if the work done over any closed
path is zero.
• For a single-particle system, the difference of
• A non-conservative force is one for which the
potential energy is the opposite of the work done
work done depends on the path.
by the forces acting on the particle as it moves
• For a conservative force, the infinitesimal work is
from one position to another.
an exact differential. This implies conditions on
• Since only differences of potential energy are
the derivatives of the force’s components.
physically meaningful, the zero of the potential
• The component of a conservative force, in a
energy function can be chosen at a convenient
particular direction, equals the negative of the
location.
derivative of the potential energy for that force,
• The potential energies for Earth’s constant
with respect to a displacement in that direction.
gravity, near its surface, and for a Hooke’s law
force are linear and quadratic functions of 8.3 Conservation of Energy
position, respectively.
• A conserved quantity is a physical property that
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces stays constant regardless of the path taken.
• A form of the work-energy theorem says that the
• A conservative force is one for which the work
change in the mechanical energy of a particle
done is independent of path. Equivalently, a force
equals the work done on it by non-conservative

368 8 • Chapter Review
forces. • The negative of the slope of the potential energy
• If non-conservative forces do no work and there curve, for a particle, equals the one-dimensional
are no external forces, the mechanical energy of component of the conservative force on the
a particle stays constant. This is a statement of particle. At an equilibrium point, the slope is zero
the conservation of mechanical energy and there and is a stable (unstable) equilibrium for a
is no change in the total mechanical energy. potential energy minimum (maximum).
• For one-dimensional particle motion, in which
8.5 Sources of Energy
the mechanical energy is constant and the
potential energy is known, the particle’s position, • Energy can be transferred from one system to
as a function of time, can be found by evaluating another and transformed or converted from one
an integral that is derived from the conservation type into another. Some of the basic types of
of mechanical energy. energy are kinetic, potential, thermal, and
electromagnetic.
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
• Renewable energy sources are those that are
• Interpreting a one-dimensional potential energy replenished by ongoing natural processes, over
diagram allows you to obtain qualitative, and human time scales. Examples are wind, water,
some quantitative, information about the motion geothermal, and solar power.
of a particle. • Non-renewable energy sources are those that are
• At a turning point, the potential energy equals depleted by consumption, over human time
the mechanical energy and the kinetic energy is scales. Examples are fossil fuel and nuclear
zero, indicating that the direction of the velocity power.
reverses there.
Conceptual Questions
8.1 Potential Energy of a System 5 . What is the dominant factor that affects the
speed of an object that started from rest down a
1 . The kinetic energy of a system must always be
frictionless incline if the only work done on the
positive or zero. Explain whether this is true for
object is from gravitational forces?
the potential energy of a system.
6 . Two people observe a leaf falling from a tree.
2 . The force exerted by a diving board is
One person is standing on a ladder and the other
conservative, provided the internal friction is
is on the ground. If each person were to
negligible. Assuming friction is negligible,
compare the energy of the leaf observed, would
describe changes in the potential energy of a
each person find the following to be the same or
diving board as a swimmer drives from it,
different for the leaf, from the point where it falls
starting just before the swimmer steps on the
off the tree to when it hits the ground: (a) the
board until just after their feet leave it.
kinetic energy of the leaf; (b) the change in
3 . Describe the gravitational potential energy gravitational potential energy; (c) the final
transfers and transformations for a javelin, gravitational potential energy?
starting from the point at which an athlete picks
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
up the javelin and ending when the javelin is
stuck into the ground after being thrown. 7 . What is the physical meaning of a non-
conservative force?
4 . A couple of soccer balls of equal mass are
kicked off the ground at the same speed but at 8 . A bottle rocket is shot straight up in the air with
different angles. Soccer ball A is kicked off at an a speed . If the air resistance is ignored,
angle slightly above the horizontal, whereas ball the bottle would go up to a height of
B is kicked slightly below the vertical. How do approximately . However, the rocket goes
each of the following compare for ball A and ball up to only before returning to the ground.
B? (a) The initial kinetic energy and (b) the What happened? Explain, giving only a
change in gravitational potential energy from the qualitative response.
ground to the highest point? If the energy in part
9 . An external force acts on a particle during a trip
(a) differs from part (b), explain why there is a
from one point to another and back to that same
difference between the two energies.
point. This particle is only affected by
Access for free at openstax.org

8 • Chapter Review 369
conservative forces. Does this particle’s kinetic 14 . In a common physics demonstration, a bowling ball
energy and potential energy change as a result is suspended from the ceiling by a rope.
of this trip? The professor pulls the ball away from its
equilibrium position and holds it adjacent to his
8.3 Conservation of Energy
nose, as shown below. He releases the ball so that it
10 . When a body slides down an inclined plane, swings directly away from him. Does he get struck
does the work of friction depend on the body’s by the ball on its return swing? What is he trying to
initial speed? Answer the same question for a show in this demonstration?
body sliding down a curved surface.
11 . Consider the following scenario. A car for which
friction is not negligible accelerates from rest down
a hill, running out of gasoline after a short distance
(see below). The driver lets the car coast farther
down the hill, then up and over a small crest. He
then coasts down that hill into a gas station, where
he brakes to a stop and fills the tank with gasoline.
15 . A child jumps up and down on a bed, reaching a
Identify the forms of energy the car has, and how
higher height after each bounce. Explain how the
they are changed and transferred in this series of
child can increase his maximum gravitational
events.
potential energy with each bounce.
16 . Can a non-conservative force increase the
mechanical energy of the system?
17 . Neglecting air resistance, how much would I
have to raise the vertical height if I wanted to
double the impact speed of a falling object?
18 . A box is dropped onto a spring at its equilibrium
position. The spring compresses with the box
attached and comes to rest. Since the spring is
in the vertical position, does the change in the
12 . A dropped ball bounces to one-half its original
gravitational potential energy of the box while
height. Discuss the energy transformations that
the spring is compressing need to be considered
take place.
in this problem?
13 . “ constant is a special case of the
work-energy theorem.” Discuss this statement.
Problems
8.1 Potential Energy of a System 21 . A camera weighing 10 N falls from a small drone
hovering overhead and enters free fall.
19 . Using values from Table 8.1, how many DNA
What is the gravitational potential energy change
molecules could be broken by the energy carried
of the camera from the drone to the ground if
by a single electron in the beam of an old-
you take a reference point of (a) the ground
fashioned TV tube? (These electrons were not
being zero gravitational potential energy? (b)
dangerous in themselves, but they did create
The drone being zero gravitational potential
dangerous X-rays. Later-model tube TVs had
energy? What is the gravitational potential
shielding that absorbed X-rays before they
energy of the camera (c) before it falls from the
escaped and exposed viewers.)
drone and (d) after the camera lands on the
20 . If the energy in fusion bombs were used to ground if the reference point of zero gravitational
supply the energy needs of the world, how many potential energy is taken to be a second person
of the 9-megaton variety would be needed for a looking out of a building from the ground?
year’s supply of energy (using data from this
22 . Someone drops a pebble off of a docked
equation)?
cruise ship, above the water level. A