# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 247-250
############################################################

Chapter 5 | Relativity 239
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
11. What happens to the relativistic Doppler effect when
5.1Invariance of Physical Laws relative velocity is zero? Is this the expected result?
1. Which of Einstein’s postulates of special relativity
includes a concept that does not fit with the ideas of 12. Is the relativistic Doppler effect consistent with the
classical physics? Explain. classicalDopplereffectintherespectthat λ islargerfor
obs
motion away?
2. Is Earth an inertial frame of reference? Is the sun?
Justify your response.
13. All galaxies farther away than about 50×10 6 ly
exhibitaredshiftintheiremittedlightthatisproportional
3. Whenyouareflyinginacommercialjet,itmayappear
to distance, with those farther and farther away having
to you that the airplane is stationary and Earth is moving
progressively greater red shifts. What does this imply,
beneath you. Is this point of view valid? Discuss briefly.
assuming that the only source of red shift is relative
motion?
5.3Time Dilation
4. (a)Doesmotionaffecttherateofaclockasmeasured
5.8Relativistic Momentum
byanobservermovingwithit?(b)Doesmotionaffecthow
14. How does modern relativity modify the law of
an observer moving relative to a clock measures its rate?
conservation of momentum?
5. To whom does the elapsed time for a process seem
15. Is it possible for an external force to be acting on
to be longer, an observer moving relative to the process
a system and relativistic momentum to be conserved?
or an observer moving with the process? Which observer
Explain.
measures the interval of proper time?
6. (a) How could you travel far into the future of Earth
5.9Relativistic Energy
without aging significantly? (b) Could this method also
allow you to travel into the past? 16. How are the classical laws of conservation of energy
and conservation of mass modified by modern relativity?
5.4Length Contraction 17. What happens to the mass of water in a pot when it
cools,assumingnomoleculesescapeorareadded?Isthis
7. To whom does an object seem greater in length, an
observable in practice? Explain.
observer moving with the object or an observer moving
relative to the object? Which observer measures the
object’s proper length? 18. Consider a thought experiment. You place an
expanded balloon of air on weighing scales outside in the
early morning. The balloon stays on the scales and you
8. Relativistic effects such as time dilation and length
are able to measure changes in its mass. Does the mass
contractionarepresentforcarsandairplanes.Whydothese
of the balloon change as the day progresses? Discuss the
effects seem strange to us?
difficulties in carrying out this experiment.
9. Suppose an astronaut is moving relative to Earth at
19. Themassofthefuelinanuclearreactordecreasesby
a significant fraction of the speed of light. (a) Does he
anobservableamountasitputsoutenergy.Isthesametrue
observe the rate of his clocks to have slowed? (b) What
forthecoalandoxygencombinedinaconventionalpower
change in the rate of earthbound clocks does he see? (c)
plant? If so, is this observable in practice for the coal and
Does his ship seem to him to shorten? (d)What about the
oxygen? Explain.
distance between two stars that lie in the direction of his
motion?(e)Doheandanearthboundobserveragreeonhis
velocity relative to Earth? 20. We know that the velocity of an object with mass
has an upper limit of c. Is there an upper limit on its
momentum? Its energy? Explain.
5.7Doppler Effect for Light
21. Giventhefactthatlighttravelsatc,canithavemass?
10. Explainthemeaningoftheterms“redshift”and“blue
Explain.
shift” as they relate to the relativistic Doppler effect.

240 Chapter 5 | Relativity
22. IfyouuseanEarth-basedtelescope toprojectalaser Does this violate modern relativity? (Note that light is
beam onto the moon, you can move the spot across the being sent from the Earth to the moon, not across the
moon’ssurfaceatavelocitygreaterthanthespeedoflight. surface of the moon.)
PROBLEMS
accordingtotheearthboundobserver?(b)Howfardoesit
5.3Time Dilation travelasviewedbyanobservermovingwithit?Baseyour
calculationonitsvelocityrelativetotheEarthandthetime
23. (a) What is γ if v=0.250c? (b) If v=0.500c?
itlives(propertime).(c)Verifythatthesetwodistancesare
related through length contraction γ =3.20.
24. (a) What is γ if v=0.100c? (b) If v=0.900c?
34. (a)HowlongwouldthemuoninExample 5.3have
25. Particlescalled π-mesonsareproducedbyaccelerator lived as observed on Earth if its velocity was 0.0500c?
beams.Iftheseparticlestravelat 2.70×10 8 m/s andlive (b) How far would it have traveled as observed on Earth?
(c) What distance is this in the muon’s frame?
2.60×10 −8 s when at rest relative to an observer, how
long do they live as viewed in the laboratory?
35. Unreasonable Results A spaceship is heading
directlytowardEarthatavelocityof0.800c.Theastronaut
26. Supposeaparticlecalledakaoniscreatedbycosmic onboardclaimsthathecansendacanistertowardtheEarth
radiation striking the atmosphere. It moves by you at at 1.20c relative to Earth. (a) Calculate the velocity the
0.980c, anditlives 1.24×10 −8 s whenatrestrelative canister must have relative to the spaceship. (b) What is
unreasonableaboutthisresult?(c)Whichassumptionsare
to an observer. How long does it live as you observe it?
unreasonable or inconsistent?
27. A neutral π-meson is a particle that can be created
by accelerator beams. If one such particle lives
5.5The Lorentz Transformation
1.40×10 −16 s as measured in the laboratory, and
36. Describethefollowingphysicaloccurrencesasevents,
0.840×10 −16 s whenatrestrelativetoanobserver,what thatis,intheform(x,y,z,t):(a)Apostmanringsadoorbell
is its velocity relative to the laboratory? of a house precisely at noon. (b) At the same time as the
doorbellisrung,asliceofbreadpopsoutofatoasterthat
islocated10mfromthedoorintheeastdirectionfromthe
28. A neutron lives 900 s when at rest relative to an
door.(c)Tensecondslater,anairplanearrivesattheairport,
observer. How fast is the neutron moving relative to an
whichis10kmfromthedoorintheeastdirectionand2km
observer who measures its life span to be 2065 s?
to the south.
29. If relativistic effects are to be less than 1%, then
γ must be less than 1.01. At what relative velocity is
37. Describe what happens to the angle α=tan(v/c),
and therefore to the transformed axes in Figure 5.17, as
γ =1.01?
therelativevelocityvoftheSand S′ framesofreference
approachesc.
30. If relativistic effects are to be less than 3%, then
γ must be less than 1.03. At what relative velocity is
38. Describe the shape of the world line on a space-
γ =1.03? time diagram of (a) an object that remains at rest at a
specificpositionalongthex-axis;(b)anobjectthatmoves
at constant velocity u in the x-direction; (c) an object that
begins at rest and accelerates at a constant rate of in the
5.4Length Contraction
positivex-direction.
31. Aspaceship,200mlongasseenonboard,movesby
the Earth at 0.970c. What is its length as measured by an
39. Amanstandingstillatatrainstationwatchestwoboys
earthbound observer?
throwingabaseballinamovingtrain.Supposethetrainis
movingeastwithaconstantspeedof20m/sandoneofthe
32. How fast would a 6.0 m-long sports car have to be boysthrowstheballwithaspeedof5m/swithrespectto
going past you in order for it to appear only 5.5 m long? himself toward the other boy, who is 5 m west from him.
Whatisthevelocityoftheballasobservedbythemanon
33. (a) How far does the muon in Example 5.3 travel the station?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 5 | Relativity 241
40. When observed from the sun at a particular instant, 47. Twoplanetsareonacollisioncourse,headingdirectly
EarthandMarsappeartomoveinoppositedirectionswith toward each other at 0.250c. A spaceship sent from one
speeds108,000km/hand86,871km/h,respectively.What planet approaches the second at 0.750c as seen by the
is the speed of Mars at this instant when observed from second planet. What is the velocity of the ship relative to
Earth? the first planet?
41. A man is running on a straight road perpendicular to 48. When a missile is shot from one spaceship toward
a train track and away from the track at a speed of 12 m/ another, it leaves the first at 0.950c and approaches the
s.Thetrainismovingwithaspeedof30m/swithrespect other at 0.750c. What is the relative velocity of the two
tothetrack.Whatisthespeedofthemanwithrespecttoa ships?
passenger sitting at rest in the train?
49. Whatistherelativevelocityoftwospaceshipsifone
42. A man is running on a straight road that makes 30° firesamissileattheotherat0.750candtheotherobserves
withthetraintrack.Themanisrunninginthedirectionon it to approach at 0.950c?
the road that is away from the track at a speed of 12 m/s.
Thetrainismovingwithaspeedof30m/swithrespectto 50. Prove that for any relative velocity v between two
the track. What is the speed of the man with respect to a observers, a beam of light sent from one to the other will
passenger sitting at rest in the train? approach at speed c (provided that v is less than c, of
course).
43. In a frame at rest with respect to the billiard table, a
billiardballofmassmmovingwithspeedvstrikesanother 51. Show that for any relative velocity v between two
billiard ball of mass m at rest. The first ball comes to rest observers, a beam of light projected by one directly away
afterthecollisionwhilethesecondballtakesoffwithspeed from the other will move away at the speed of light
v in the original direction of the motion of the first ball. (provided thatvis less thanc, of course).
Thisshowsthatmomentumisconservedinthisframe.(a)
Now,describethesamecollisionfromtheperspectiveofa
frame that is moving with speed v in the direction of the 5.7Doppler Effect for Light
motionofthefirstball.(b)Isthemomentumconservedin
52. Ahighwaypatrolofficerusesadevicethatmeasures
this frame?
the speed of vehicles by bouncing radar off them and
measuring the Doppler shift. The outgoing radar has a
44. In a frame at rest with respect to the billiard table,
frequency of 100 GHz and the returning echo has a
twobilliardballsofsamemassmaremovingtowardeach
frequency 15.0 kHz higher. What is the velocity of the
other with the same speed v. After the collision, the two
vehicle? Note that there are two Doppler shifts in echoes.
balls come to rest. (a) Show that momentum is conserved
Be certain not to round off until the end of the problem,
in this frame. (b) Now, describe the same collision from
because the effect is small.
the perspective of a frame that is moving with speed v
in the direction of the motion of the first ball. (c) Is the
momentum conserved in this frame?
5.8Relativistic Momentum
53. Find the momentum of a helium nucleus having a
45. In a frame S, two events are observed: event 1: a
pion is created at rest at the origin and event 2: the pion mass of 6.68×10 −27 kg that is moving at 0.200c.
disintegrates after time τ. Another observer in a frame
S′ is moving in the positive direction along the positive 54. What is the momentum of an electron traveling at
x-axis with a constant speed v and observes the same two 0.980c?
eventsinhisframe.Theoriginsofthetwoframescoincide
at t=t′=0. (a) Find the positions and timings of these
55. (a)Findthemomentumofa 1.00×10 9 -kg asteroid
two events in the frame S′ (a) according to the Galilean
heading towards Earth at 30.0 km/s. (b) Find the ratio of
transformation, and (b) according to the Lorentz
thismomentumtotheclassicalmomentum.(Hint:Usethe
transformation.
approximation that γ =1+(1/2)v2/c2 at low velocities.)
5.6Relativistic Velocity Transformation
56. (a) What is the momentum of a 2000-kg satellite
46. If two spaceships are heading directly toward each orbitingat4.00km/s?(b)Findtheratioofthismomentum
otherat0.800c,atwhatspeedmustacanisterbeshotfrom to the classical momentum. (Hint: Use the approximation
thefirstshiptoapproachtheotherat0.999casseenbythe that γ =1+(1/2)v2/c2 at low velocities.)
second ship?