# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 459-464
############################################################

9 • Chapter Review 447
of length a and width b made up of a material of
nonuniform density. The density is such that
when the rectangle is placed in the xy-plane, the
density is given by .
72 . A cube of side a is cut out of another cube of
side b as shown in the figure below.
Express your answers in a coordinate system
that has the origin at the center of the cylinder.
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
Find the location of the center of mass of the
77 . (a) A 5.00-kg squid initially at rest ejects 0.250
structure. (Hint: Think of the missing part as a
kg of fluid with a velocity of 10.0 m/s. What is
negative mass overlapping a positive mass.)
the recoil velocity of the squid if the ejection is
73 . Find the center of mass of a cone of uniform done in 0.100 s and there is a 5.00-N frictional
density that has a radius R at the base, height h, force opposing the squid’s movement?
and mass M. Let the origin be at the center of the (b) How much energy is lost to work done
base of the cone and have +z going through the against friction?
cone vertex.
78 . A rocket takes off from Earth and reaches a
74 . Find the center of mass of a thin wire of mass m speed of 100 m/s in 10.0 s. If the exhaust speed
and length L bent in a semicircular shape. Let is 1500 m/s and the mass of fuel burned is 100
the origin be at the center of the semicircle and kg, what was the initial mass of the rocket?
have the wire arc from the +x axis, cross the +y
79 . Repeat the preceding problem but for a rocket
axis, and terminate at the −x axis.
that takes off from a space station, where there
75 . Find the center of mass of a uniform thin is no gravity other than the negligible gravity due
semicircular plate of radius R. Let the origin be to the space station.
at the center of the semicircle, the plate arc from
80 . How much fuel would be needed for a 1000-kg
the +x axis to the −x axis, and the z axis be
rocket (this is its mass with no fuel) to take off
perpendicular to the plate.
from Earth and reach 1000 m/s in 30 s? The
76 . Find the center of mass of a sphere of mass M exhaust speed is 1000 m/s.
and radius R and a cylinder of mass m, radius r,
81 . What exhaust speed is required to accelerate a
and height h arranged as shown below.
rocket in deep space from 800 m/s to 1000 m/s
in 5.0 s if the total rocket mass is 1200 kg and
the rocket only has 50 kg of fuel left?
82 . Unreasonable Results Squids have been
reported to jump from the ocean and travel 30.0
m (measured horizontally) before re-entering
the water.
(a) Calculate the initial speed of the squid if it
leaves the water at an angle of 20.0°, assuming
negligible lift from the air and negligible air
resistance.
(b) The squid propels itself by squirting water.

448 9 • Chapter Review
What fraction of its mass would it have to eject (c) What is unreasonable about the results?
in order to achieve the speed found in the (d) Which premise is unreasonable, or which
previous part? The water is ejected at 12.0 m/s; premises are inconsistent?
gravitational force and friction are neglected.
Additional Problems
83 . Two 70-kg canoers paddle in a single, 50-kg of their masses?
canoe. Their paddling moves the canoe at 1.2
94 . You are coasting on your 10-kg bicycle at 15 m/s
m/s with respect to the water, and the river
and a 5.0-g bug splatters on your helmet. The
they’re in flows at 4 m/s with respect to the
bug was initially moving at 2.0 m/s in the same
land. What is their momentum with respect to
direction as you. If your mass is 60 kg, (a) what
the land?
is the initial momentum of you plus your bicycle?
84 . Which has a larger magnitude of momentum: a (b) What is the initial momentum of the bug? (c)
3000-kg elephant moving at 40 km/h or a 60-kg What is your change in velocity due to the
cheetah moving at 112 km/h? collision with the bug? (d) What would the
change in velocity have been if the bug were
85 . A driver applies the brakes and reduces the
traveling in the opposite direction?
speed of her car by 20%, without changing the
direction in which the car is moving. By how 95 . A load of gravel is dumped straight down into a
much does the car’s momentum change? 30 000-kg freight car coasting at 2.2 m/s on a
straight section of a railroad. If the freight car’s
86 . You friend claims that momentum is mass
speed after receiving the gravel is 1.5 m/s, what
multiplied by velocity, so things with more mass
mass of gravel did it receive?
have more momentum. Do you agree? Explain.
96 . Two carts on a straight track collide head on.
87 . Dropping a glass on a cement floor is more likely
The first cart was moving at 3.6 m/s in the
to break the glass than if it is dropped from the
positive x direction and the second was moving
same height on a grass lawn. Explain in terms of
at 2.4 m/s in the opposite direction. After the
the impulse.
collision, the second car continues moving in its
88 . Your 1500-kg sports car accelerates from 0 to initial direction of motion at 0.24 m/s. If the
30 m/s in 10 s. What average force is exerted on mass of the second car is 5.0 times that of the
it during this acceleration? first, what is the final velocity of the first car?
89 . A ball of mass is dropped. What is the formula 97 . A 100-kg astronaut finds himself separated from
for the impulse exerted on the ball from the his spaceship by 10 m and moving away from
instant it is dropped to an arbitrary time later? the spaceship at 0.1 m/s. To get back to the
Ignore air resistance. spaceship, he throws a 10-kg tool bag away
from the spaceship at 5.0 m/s. How long will he
90 . Repeat the preceding problem, but including a
take to return to the spaceship?
drag force due to air of
98 . Derive the equations giving the final speeds for
91 . A 5.0-g egg falls from a 90-cm-high counter onto
two objects that collide elastically, with the
the floor and breaks. What impulse is exerted by
mass of the objects being and and the
the floor on the egg?
initial speeds being and (i.e.,
92 . A car crashes into a large tree that does not second object is initially stationary).
move. The car goes from 30 m/s to 0 in 1.3 m.
99 . Repeat the preceding problem for the case when
(a) What impulse is applied to the 70 kg driver by
the initial speed of the second object is nonzero.
the seatbelt, assuming he follows the same
motion as the car? (b) What is the average force 100 . A child sleds down a hill and collides at 5.6 m/s
applied to the driver by the seatbelt? into a stationary sled that is identical to his. The
child is launched forward at the same speed,
93 . Two hockey players approach each other head
leaving behind the two sleds that lock together
on, each traveling at the same speed . They
and slide forward more slowly. What is the
collide and get tangled together, falling down
speed of the two sleds after this collision?
and moving off at a speed . What is the ratio
Access for free at openstax.org

9 • Chapter Review 449
101 . For the preceding problem, find the final speed 107 . Repeat the preceding problem if the balls collide
of each sled for the case of an elastic collision. when the center of ball 1 is at the origin and the
center of ball 2 is at the point .
102 . A 90-kg football player jumps vertically into the
air to catch a 0.50-kg football that is thrown 108 . Repeat the preceding problem if the balls collide
essentially horizontally at him at 17 m/s. What is when the center of ball 1 is at the origin and the
his horizontal speed after catching the ball?
center of ball 2 is at the point
103 . Three skydivers are plummeting earthward.
109 . Where is the center of mass of a semicircular
They are initially holding onto each other, but
wire of radius R that is centered on the origin,
then push apart. Two skydivers of mass 70 and
begins and ends on the x axis, and lies in the x,y
80 kg gain horizontal velocities of 1.2 m/s east
plane?
and 1.4 m/s southeast, respectively. What is the
horizontal velocity of the third skydiver, whose 110 . Where is the center of mass of a slice of pizza
mass is 55 kg? that was cut into eight equal slices? Assume the
origin is at the apex of the slice and measure
104 . Two billiard balls are at rest and touching each
angles with respect to an edge of the slice. The
other on a pool table. The cue ball travels at 3.8
radius of the pizza is R.
m/s along the line of symmetry between these
balls and strikes them simultaneously. If the 111 . If 1% of the Earth’s mass were transferred to the
collision is elastic, what is the velocity of the Moon, how far would the center of mass of the
three balls after the collision? Earth-Moon-population system move? The mass
of the Earth is and that of the
105 . A billiard ball traveling at
Moon is . The radius of the
collides with a wall that
Moon’s orbit is about .
is aligned in the direction. Assuming the
collision is elastic, what is the final velocity of 112 . You friend wonders how a rocket continues to
the ball? climb into the sky once it is sufficiently high
above the surface of Earth so that its expelled
106 . Two identical billiard balls collide. The first one
gasses no longer push on the surface. How do
is initially traveling at
you respond?
and the second one at
. Suppose they collide 113 . To increase the acceleration of a rocket, should
when the center of ball 1 is at the origin and the you throw rocks out of the front window of the
center of ball 2 is at the point where R is rocket or out of the back window?
the radius of the balls. What is the final velocity
of each ball?
Challenge Problems
114 . A 65-kg person jumps from the first floor window of
a burning building and lands almost vertically on the
ground with a horizontal velocity of 3 m/s and
vertical velocity of . Upon impact with the
ground he is brought to rest in a short time. The
force experienced by his feet depends on whether
he keeps his knees stiff or bends them. Find the
force on his feet in each case.
a. First find the impulse on the person from the
impact on the ground. Calculate both its
magnitude and direction.
b. Find the average force on the feet if the person
keeps his leg stiff and straight and his center
of mass drops by only 1 cm vertically and 1 cm
horizontally during the impact.

450 9 • Chapter Review
c. Find the average force on the feet if the person
bends his legs throughout the impact so that
his center of mass drops by 50 cm vertically
and 5 cm horizontally during the impact.
d. Compare the results of part (b) and (c), and
draw conclusions about which way is better.
You will need to find the time the impact lasts by
making reasonable assumptions about the
acceleration opposite to the motion. Although the
force is not constant during the impact, working with
constant average force for this problem is
acceptable.
115 . Two projectiles of mass and are fired at
the same speed but in opposite directions from
two launch sites separated by a distance D. They
both reach the same spot in their highest point
and strike there. As a result of the impact they
stick together and move as a single body
afterwards. Find the place they will land.
116 . Two identical objects (such as billiard balls) have
a one-dimensional collision in which one is
initially motionless. After the collision, the
moving object is stationary and the other moves
with the same speed as the other originally had.
Show that both momentum and kinetic energy
are conserved.
117 . A ramp of mass M is at rest on a horizontal surface.
A small cart of mass m is placed at the top of the
ramp and released. What are the velocities of the ramp and the cart
relative to the ground at the instant the cart leaves
the ramp?
118 . Find the center of mass of the structure given in
the figure below. Assume a uniform thickness of 20
cm, and a uniform density of
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 10
Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.1 Brazos wind farm in west Texas. During 2019, wind farms in the United States had an average power output of 34 gigawatts,
which is enough to power 28 million homes. (credit: modification of work by U.S. Department of Energy)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1 Rotational Variables
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
10.6 Torque
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion
INTRODUCTION In previous chapters, we described motion (kinematics) and how to change motion (dynamics),
and we defined important concepts such as energy for objects that can be considered as point masses. Point
masses, by definition, have no shape and so can only undergo translational motion. However, we know from
everyday life that rotational motion is also very important and that many objects that move have both translation
and rotation. The wind turbines in our chapter opening image are a prime example of how rotational motion impacts
our daily lives, as the market for clean energy sources continues to grow.
We begin to address rotational motion in this chapter, starting with fixed-axis rotation. Fixed-axis rotation describes
the rotation around a fixed axis of a rigid body; that is, an object that does not deform as it moves. We will show how
to apply all the ideas we’ve developed up to this point about translational motion to an object rotating around a fixed
axis. In the next chapter, we extend these ideas to more complex rotational motion, including objects that both
rotate and translate, and objects that do not have a fixed rotational axis.