# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 267-274
############################################################

6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 255
This can be solved for the magnitude of the drag force of the water in terms of known quantities:
Substituting known values gives
The direction of has already been determined to be in the direction opposite to or at an angle of south
of west.
Significance
The numbers used in this example are reasonable for a moderately large barge. It is certainly difficult to obtain
larger accelerations with tugboats, and small speeds are desirable to avoid running the barge into the docks. Drag is
relatively small for a well-designed hull at low speeds, consistent with the answer to this example, where is less
than 1/600th of the weight of the ship.
In Newton’s Laws of Motion, we discussed the normal force, which is a contact force that acts normal to the surface
so that an object does not have an acceleration perpendicular to the surface. The bathroom scale is an excellent
example of a normal force acting on a body. It provides a quantitative reading of how much it must push upward to
support the weight of an object. But can you predict what you would see on the dial of a bathroom scale if you stood
on it during an elevator ride? Will you see a value greater than your weight when the elevator starts up? What about
when the elevator moves upward at a constant speed? Take a guess before reading the next example.
EXAMPLE 6.3
What Does the Bathroom Scale Read in an Elevator?
Figure 6.5 shows a 75.0-kg man (weight of about 165 lb.) standing on a bathroom scale in an elevator. Calculate the
scale reading: (a) if the elevator accelerates upward at a rate of and (b) if the elevator moves upward at a
constant speed of 1 m/s.

256 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.5 (a) The various forces acting when a person stands on a bathroom scale in an elevator. The arrows are approximately correct
for when the elevator is accelerating upward—broken arrows represent forces too large to be drawn to scale. is the tension in the
supporting cable, is the weight of the person, is the weight of the scale, is the weight of the elevator, is the force of the scale on
the person, is the force of the person on the scale, is the force of the scale on the floor of the elevator, and is the force of the floor
upward on the scale. (b) The free-body diagram shows only the external forces acting on the designated system of interest—the
person—and is the diagram we use for the solution of the problem.
Strategy
If the scale at rest is accurate, its reading equals , the magnitude of the force the person exerts downward on it.
Figure 6.5(a) shows the numerous forces acting on the elevator, scale, and person. It makes this one-dimensional
problem look much more formidable than if the person is chosen to be the system of interest and a free-body
diagram is drawn, as in Figure 6.5(b). Analysis of the free-body diagram using Newton’s laws can produce answers
to both Figure 6.5(a) and (b) of this example, as well as some other questions that might arise. The only forces
acting on the person are his weight and the upward force of the scale According to Newton’s third law, and
are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that we need to find in order to find what the scale reads.
We can do this, as usual, by applying Newton’s second law,
From the free-body diagram, we see that so we have
Solving for gives us an equation with only one unknown:
or, because simply
Access for free at openstax.org

6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 257
No assumptions were made about the acceleration, so this solution should be valid for a variety of accelerations in
addition to those in this situation. (Note: We are considering the case when the elevator is accelerating upward. If
the elevator is accelerating downward, Newton’s second law becomes )
Solution
a. We have so that
yielding
b. Now, what happens when the elevator reaches a constant upward velocity? Will the scale still read more than
his weight? For any constant velocity—up, down, or stationary—acceleration is zero because and
Thus,
or
which gives
Significance
The scale reading in Figure 6.5(a) is about 185 lb. What would the scale have read if he were stationary? Since his
acceleration would be zero, the force of the scale would be equal to his weight:
Thus, the scale reading in the elevator is greater than his 735-N (165-lb.) weight. This means that the scale is
pushing up on the person with a force greater than his weight, as it must in order to accelerate him upward. Clearly,
the greater the acceleration of the elevator, the greater the scale reading, consistent with what you feel in rapidly
accelerating versus slowly accelerating elevators. In Figure 6.5(b), the scale reading is 735 N, which equals the
person’s weight. This is the case whenever the elevator has a constant velocity—moving up, moving down, or
stationary.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.1
Now calculate the scale reading when the elevator accelerates downward at a rate of
The solution to the previous example also applies to an elevator accelerating downward, as mentioned. When an
elevator accelerates downward, a is negative, and the scale reading is less than the weight of the person. If a
constant downward velocity is reached, the scale reading again becomes equal to the person’s weight. If the
elevator is in free fall and accelerating downward at g, then the scale reading is zero and the person appears to be
weightless.
EXAMPLE 6.4
Two Attached Blocks
Figure 6.6 shows a block of mass on a frictionless, horizontal surface. It is pulled by a light string that passes
over a frictionless and massless pulley. The other end of the string is connected to a block of mass Find the
acceleration of the blocks and the tension in the string in terms of

258 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.6 (a) Block 1 is connected by a light string to block 2. (b) The free-body diagrams of the blocks.
Strategy
We draw a free-body diagram for each mass separately, as shown in Figure 6.6. Then we analyze each one to find
the required unknowns. The forces on block 1 are the gravitational force, the contact force of the surface, and the
tension in the string. Block 2 is subjected to the gravitational force and the string tension. Newton’s second law
applies to each, so we write two vector equations:
For block 1:
For block 2:
Notice that is the same for both blocks. Since the string and the pulley have negligible mass, and since there is no
friction in the pulley, the tension is the same throughout the string. We can now write component equations for each
block. All forces are either horizontal or vertical, so we can use the same horizontal/vertical coordinate system for
both objects
Solution
The component equations follow from the vector equations above. We see that block 1 has the vertical forces
balanced, so we ignore them and write an equation relating the x-components. There are no horizontal forces on
block 2, so only the y-equation is written. We obtain these results:
When block 1 moves to the right, block 2 travels an equal distance downward; thus, Writing the
common acceleration of the blocks as we now have
and
From these two equations, we can express a and T in terms of the masses
Access for free at openstax.org

6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 259
and
Significance
Notice that the tension in the string is less than the weight of the block hanging from the end of it. A common error in
problems like this is to set You can see from the free-body diagram of block 2 that cannot be correct if the
block is accelerating.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.2
Calculate the acceleration of the system, and the tension in the string, when the masses are and
EXAMPLE 6.5
Atwood Machine
A classic problem in physics, similar to the one we just solved, is that of the Atwood machine, which consists of a
rope running over a pulley, with two objects of different mass attached. It is particularly useful in understanding the
connection between force and motion. In Figure 6.7, and Consider the pulley to be
frictionless. (a) If is released, what will its acceleration be? (b) What is the tension in the string?
FIGURE 6.7 An Atwood machine and free-body diagrams for each of the two blocks.
Strategy
We draw a free-body diagram for each mass separately, as shown in the figure. Then we analyze each diagram to
find the required unknowns. This may involve the solution of simultaneous equations. It is also important to note the
similarity with the previous example. As block 2 accelerates with acceleration in the downward direction, block 1
accelerates upward with acceleration . Thus,
Solution
a. We have

260 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
(The negative sign in front of indicates that accelerates downward; both blocks accelerate at the
same rate, but in opposite directions.) Solve the two equations simultaneously (subtract them) and the result
is
Solving for a:
b. Observing the first block, we see that
Significance
The result for the acceleration given in the solution can be interpreted as the ratio of the unbalanced force on the
system, , to the total mass of the system, . We can also use the Atwood machine to measure
local gravitational field strength.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.3
Determine a general formula in terms of and g for calculating the tension in the string for the Atwood
machine shown above.
Newton’s Laws of Motion and Kinematics
Physics is most interesting and most powerful when applied to general situations that involve more than a narrow
set of physical principles. Newton’s laws of motion can also be integrated with other concepts that have been
discussed previously in this text to solve problems of motion. For example, forces produce accelerations, a topic of
kinematics, and hence the relevance of earlier chapters.
When approaching problems that involve various types of forces, acceleration, velocity, and/or position, listing the
givens and the quantities to be calculated will allow you to identify the principles involved. Then, you can refer to the
chapters that deal with a particular topic and solve the problem using strategies outlined in the text. The following
worked example illustrates how the problem-solving strategy given earlier in this chapter, as well as strategies
presented in other chapters, is applied to an integrated concept problem.
EXAMPLE 6.6
What Force Must a Soccer Player Exert to Reach Top Speed?
A soccer player starts at rest and accelerates forward, reaching a velocity of 8.00 m/s in 2.50 s. (a) What is her
average acceleration? (b) What average force does the ground exert forward on the runner so that she achieves this
acceleration? The player’s mass is 70.0 kg, and air resistance is negligible.
Strategy
To find the answers to this problem, we use the problem-solving strategy given earlier in this chapter. The solutions
to each part of the example illustrate how to apply specific problem-solving steps. In this case, we do not need to
use all of the steps. We simply identify the physical principles, and thus the knowns and unknowns; apply Newton’s
second law; and check to see whether the answer is reasonable.
Solution
a. We are given the initial and final velocities (zero and 8.00 m/s forward); thus, the change in velocity is
. We are given the elapsed time, so The unknown is acceleration, which can be
found from its definition:
Access for free at openstax.org

6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 261
Substituting the known values yields
b. Here we are asked to find the average force the ground exerts on the runner to produce this acceleration.
(Remember that we are dealing with the force or forces acting on the object of interest.) This is the reaction
force to that exerted by the player backward against the ground, by Newton’s third law. Neglecting air
resistance, this would be equal in magnitude to the net external force on the player, since this force causes her
acceleration. Since we now know the player’s acceleration and are given her mass, we can use Newton’s
second law to find the force exerted. That is,
Substituting the known values of m and a gives
This is a reasonable result: The acceleration is attainable for an athlete in good condition. The force is about 50
pounds, a reasonable average force.
Significance
This example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that include topics from different
chapters. The first step is to identify the physical principles, the knowns, and the unknowns involved in the problem.
The second step is to solve for the unknown, in this case using Newton’s second law. Finally, we check our answer to
ensure it is reasonable. These techniques for integrated concept problems will be useful in applications of physics
outside of a physics course, such as in your profession, in other science disciplines, and in everyday life.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.4
The soccer player stops after completing the play described above, but now notices that the ball is in position to be
stolen. If she now experiences a force of 126 N to attempt to steal the ball, which is 2.00 m away from her, how long
will it take her to get to the ball?
EXAMPLE 6.7
What Force Acts on a Model Helicopter?
A 1.50-kg model helicopter has a velocity of at It is accelerated at a constant rate for two seconds
(2.00 s) after which it has a velocity of What is the magnitude of the resultant force acting on
the helicopter during this time interval?
Strategy
We can easily set up a coordinate system in which the x-axis direction) is horizontal, and the y-axis direction) is
vertical. We know that and From this, we can calculate the
acceleration by the definition; we can then apply Newton’s second law.
Solution
We have