# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 692-697
############################################################

680 14 • Fluid Mechanics
where V is the volume and t is the elapsed time. In Figure 14.26, the volume of the cylinder is Ax, so the flow rate is
FIGURE 14.26 Flow rate is the volume of fluid flowing past a point through the area A per unit time. Here, the shaded cylinder of fluid flows
past point P in a uniform pipe in time t.
The SI unit for flow rate is but several other units for Q are in common use, such as liters per minute (L/min).
Note that a liter (L) is 1/1000 of a cubic meter or 1000 cubic centimeters
Flow rate and velocity are related, but quite different, physical quantities. To make the distinction clear, consider the
flow rate of a river. The greater the velocity of the water, the greater the flow rate of the river. But flow rate also
depends on the size and shape of the river. A rapid mountain stream carries far less water than the Amazon River in
Brazil, for example. Figure 14.26 illustrates the volume flow rate. The volume flow rate is where
is the cross-sectional area of the pipe and v is the magnitude of the velocity.
The precise relationship between flow rate Q and average speed v is
where A is the cross-sectional area and is the average speed. The relationship tells us that flow rate is directly
proportional to both the average speed of the fluid and the cross-sectional area of a river, pipe, or other conduit. The
larger the conduit, the greater its cross-sectional area. Figure 14.26 illustrates how this relationship is obtained. The
shaded cylinder has a volume , which flows past the point P in a time t. Dividing both sides of this
relationship by t gives
We note that and the average speed is . Thus the equation becomes .
Figure 14.27 shows an incompressible fluid flowing along a pipe of decreasing radius. Because the fluid is
incompressible, the same amount of fluid must flow past any point in the tube in a given time to ensure continuity of
flow. The flow is continuous because they are no sources or sinks that add or remove mass, so the mass flowing into
the pipe must be equal the mass flowing out of the pipe. In this case, because the cross-sectional area of the pipe
decreases, the velocity must necessarily increase. This logic can be extended to say that the flow rate must be the
same at all points along the pipe. In particular, for arbitrary points 1 and 2,
14.14
This is called the equation of continuity and is valid for any incompressible fluid (with constant density). The
consequences of the equation of continuity can be observed when water flows from a hose into a narrow spray
nozzle: It emerges with a large speed—that is the purpose of the nozzle. Conversely, when a river empties into one
end of a reservoir, the water slows considerably, perhaps picking up speed again when it leaves the other end of the
reservoir. In other words, speed increases when cross-sectional area decreases, and speed decreases when cross-
sectional area increases.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.5 • Fluid Dynamics 681
FIGURE 14.27 When a tube narrows, the same volume occupies a greater length. For the same volume to pass points 1 and 2 in a given
time, the speed must be greater at point 2. The process is exactly reversible. If the fluid flows in the opposite direction, its speed decreases
when the tube widens. (Note that the relative volumes of the two cylinders and the corresponding velocity vector arrows are not drawn to
scale.)
Since liquids are essentially incompressible, the equation of continuity is valid for all liquids. However, gases are
compressible, so the equation must be applied with caution to gases if they are subjected to compression or
expansion.
EXAMPLE 14.5
Calculating Fluid Speed through a Nozzle
A nozzle with a diameter of 0.500 cm is attached to a garden hose with a radius of 0.900 cm. The flow rate through
hose and nozzle is 0.500 L/s. Calculate the speed of the water (a) in the hose and (b) in the nozzle.
Strategy
We can use the relationship between flow rate and speed to find both speeds. We use the subscript 1 for the hose
and 2 for the nozzle.
Solution
a. We solve the flow rate equation for speed and use for the cross-sectional area of the hose, obtaining
Substituting values and using appropriate unit conversions yields
b. We could repeat this calculation to find the speed in the nozzle , but we use the equation of continuity to
give a somewhat different insight. The equation states
Solving for and substituting for the cross-sectional area yields
Substituting known values,
Significance
A speed of 1.96 m/s is about right for water emerging from a hose with no nozzle. The nozzle produces a
considerably faster stream merely by constricting the flow to a narrower tube.
The solution to the last part of the example shows that speed is inversely proportional to the square of the radius of
the tube, making for large effects when radius varies. We can blow out a candle at quite a distance, for example, by

682 14 • Fluid Mechanics
pursing our lips, whereas blowing on a candle with our mouth wide open is quite ineffective.
Mass Conservation
The rate of flow of a fluid can also be described by the mass flow rate or mass rate of flow. This is the rate at which a
mass of the fluid moves past a point. Refer once again to Figure 14.26, but this time consider the mass in the
shaded volume. The mass can be determined from the density and the volume:
The mass flow rate is then
where is the density, A is the cross-sectional area, and v is the magnitude of the velocity. The mass flow rate is an
important quantity in fluid dynamics and can be used to solve many problems. Consider Figure 14.27. The pipe in
the figure starts at the inlet with a cross sectional area of and constricts to an outlet with a smaller cross
sectional area of . The mass of fluid entering the pipe has to be equal to the mass of fluid leaving the pipe. For
this reason the velocity at the outlet is greater than the velocity of the inlet . Using the fact that the mass of
fluid entering the pipe must be equal to the mass of fluid exiting the pipe, we can find a relationship between the
velocity and the cross-sectional area by taking the rate of change of the mass in and the mass out:
14.15
Equation 14.15 is also known as the continuity equation in general form. If the density of the fluid remains constant
through the constriction—that is, the fluid is incompressible—then the density cancels from the continuity equation,
The equation reduces to show that the volume flow rate into the pipe equals the volume flow rate out of the pipe.
FIGURE 14.28 Geometry for deriving the equation of continuity. The amount of liquid entering the cross-sectional (shaded) area must equal
the amount of liquid leaving the cross-sectional area if the liquid is incompressible.
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the terms in Bernoulli’s equation
• Explain how Bernoulli’s equation is related to the conservation of energy
• Describe how to derive Bernoulli’s principle from Bernoulli’s equation
• Perform calculations using Bernoulli’s principle
• Describe some applications of Bernoulli’s principle
As we showed in Figure 14.27, when a fluid flows into a narrower channel, its speed increases. That means its
kinetic energy also increases. The increased kinetic energy comes from the net work done on the fluid to push it into
the channel. Also, if the fluid changes vertical position, work is done on the fluid by the gravitational force.
A pressure difference occurs when the channel narrows. This pressure difference results in a net force on the fluid
because the pressure times the area equals the force, and this net force does work. Recall the work-energy
theorem,
Access for free at openstax.org

14.6 • Bernoulli’s Equation 683
The net work done increases the fluid’s kinetic energy. As a result, the pressure drops in a rapidly moving fluid
whether or not the fluid is confined to a tube.
There are many common examples of pressure dropping in rapidly moving fluids. For instance, shower curtains have
a disagreeable habit of bulging into the shower stall when the shower is on. The reason is that the high-velocity
stream of water and air creates a region of lower pressure inside the shower, whereas the pressure on the other side
remains at the standard atmospheric pressure. This pressure difference results in a net force, pushing the curtain
inward. Similarly, when a car passes a truck on the highway, the two vehicles seem to pull toward each other. The
reason is the same: The high velocity of the air between the car and the truck creates a region of lower pressure
between the vehicles, and they are pushed together by greater pressure on the outside (Figure 14.29). This effect
was observed as far back as the mid-1800s, when it was found that trains passing in opposite directions tipped
precariously toward one another.
FIGURE 14.29 An overhead view of a car passing a truck on a highway. Air passing between the vehicles flows in a narrower channel and
must increase its speed ( is greater than ), causing the pressure between them to drop ( is less than Greater pressure on the
outside pushes the car and truck together.
Energy Conservation and Bernoulli’s Equation
The application of the principle of conservation of energy to frictionless laminar flow leads to a very useful relation
between pressure and flow speed in a fluid. This relation is called Bernoulli’s equation, named after Daniel
Bernoulli (1700–1782), who published his studies on fluid motion in his book Hydrodynamica (1738).
Consider an incompressible fluid flowing through a pipe that has a varying diameter and height, as shown in Figure
14.30. Subscripts 1 and 2 in the figure denote two locations along the pipe and illustrate the relationships between
the areas of the cross sections A, the speed of flow v, the height from ground h, and the pressure p at each point. We
assume here that the density at the two points is the same—therefore, density is denoted by without any
subscripts—and since the fluid is incompressible, the shaded volumes must be equal.
FIGURE 14.30 The geometry used for the derivation of Bernoulli’s equation.
We also assume that there are no viscous forces in the fluid, so the energy of any part of the fluid will be conserved.

684 14 • Fluid Mechanics
To derive Bernoulli’s equation, we first calculate the work that was done on the fluid:
The work done was due to the conservative force of gravity and the change in the kinetic energy of the fluid. The
change in the kinetic energy of the fluid is equal to
The change in potential energy is
The energy equation then becomes
Rearranging the equation gives Bernoulli’s equation:
This relation states that the mechanical energy of any part of the fluid changes as a result of the work done by the
fluid external to that part, due to varying pressure along the way. Since the two points were chosen arbitrarily, we
can write Bernoulli’s equation more generally as a conservation principle along the flow.
BERNOULLI’S EQUATION
For an incompressible, frictionless fluid, the combination of pressure and the sum of kinetic and potential energy
densities is constant not only over time, but also along a streamline:
14.16
A special note must be made here of the fact that in a dynamic situation, the pressures at the same height in
different parts of the fluid may be different if they have different speeds of flow.
Analyzing Bernoulli’s Equation
According to Bernoulli’s equation, if we follow a small volume of fluid along its path, various quantities in the sum
may change, but the total remains constant. Bernoulli’s equation is, in fact, just a convenient statement of
conservation of energy for an incompressible fluid in the absence of friction.
The general form of Bernoulli’s equation has three terms in it, and it is broadly applicable. To understand it better, let
us consider some specific situations that simplify and illustrate its use and meaning.
Bernoulli’s equation for static fluids
First consider the very simple situation where the fluid is static—that is, Bernoulli’s equation in that
case is
We can further simplify the equation by setting (Any height can be chosen for a reference height of zero, as
is often done for other situations involving gravitational force, making all other heights relative.) In this case, we get
This equation tells us that, in static fluids, pressure increases with depth. As we go from point 1 to point 2 in the
Access for free at openstax.org