# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 427-432
############################################################

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 417
quite cold, it is near the boiling point of liquid nitrogen, a liquid commonly used in refrigeration. You may have noticed
refrigerated trucks traveling down the highway labeled as “Liquid Nitrogen Cooled.”
YBCOceramicisamaterialthatcouldbeusefulfortransmittingelectricalenergybecausethecostsavingofreducingthe
I2R losses are larger than the cost of cooling the superconducting cable, making it financially feasible. There were and
aremanyengineeringproblemstoovercome.Forexample,unliketraditionalelectricalcables,whichareflexibleandhave
adecenttensilestrength,ceramicsarebrittleandwouldbreakratherthanstretchunderpressure.Processesthatarerather
simplewithtraditionalcables,suchasmakingconnections,becomedifficultwhenworkingwithceramics.Theproblems
are difficult and complex, and material scientists and engineers are coming up with innovative solutions.
Aninterestingconsequenceoftheresistancegoingtozeroisthatonceacurrentisestablishedinasuperconductor,itpersists
without an applied voltage source. Current loops in a superconductor have been set up and the current loops have been
observed to persist for years without decaying.
Zero resistance is not the only interesting phenomenon that occurs as the materials reach their transition temperatures. A
secondeffectistheexclusionofmagneticfields.ThisisknownastheMeissnereffect(Figure9.28).Alight,permanent
magnet placed over a superconducting sample will levitate in a stable position above the superconductor. High-speed
trainshavebeendevelopedthatlevitateonstrongsuperconductingmagnets,eliminatingthefrictionnormallyexperienced
between the train and the tracks. In Japan, the Yamanashi Maglev test line opened on April 3, 1997. In April 2015, the
MLX01 test vehicle attained a speed of 374 mph (603 km/h).
Figure 9.28 A small, strong magnet levitates over a
superconductor cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature. The
magnet levitates because the superconductor excludes magnetic
fields. (credit: Joseph J. Trout)
Table 9.3 shows a select list of elements, compounds, and high-temperature superconductors, along with the critical
temperatures for which they become superconducting. Each section is sorted from the highest critical temperature to the
lowest. Also listed is the critical magnetic field for some of the materials. This is the strength of the magnetic field that
destroys superconductivity. Finally, the type of the superconductor is listed.
Therearetwotypesofsuperconductors.Thereare30puremetalsthatexhibitzeroresistivitybelowtheircriticaltemperature
and exhibit the Meissner effect, the property of excluding magnetic fields from the interior of the superconductor while
the superconductor is at a temperature below the critical temperature. These metals are called Type I superconductors.
The superconductivity exists only below their critical temperatures and below a critical magnetic field strength. Type I
superconductors are well described by the BCS theory (described next). Type I superconductors have limited practical
applications because the strength of the critical magnetic field needed to destroy the superconductivity is quite low.
TypeIIsuperconductorsarefoundtohavemuchhighercriticalmagneticfieldsandthereforecancarrymuchhighercurrent
densities while remaining in the superconducting state. A collection of various ceramics containing barium-copper-oxide
havemuchhighercriticaltemperaturesforthetransitionintoasuperconductingstate.Superconductingmaterialsthatbelong
to this subcategory of the Type II superconductors are often categorized as high-temperature superconductors.
Introduction to BCS Theory
TypeIsuperconductors,alongwithsomeTypeIIsuperconductorscanbemodeledusingtheBCStheory,proposedbyJohn
Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert Schrieffer. Although the theory is beyond the scope of this chapter, a short summary
of the theory is provided here. (More detail is provided in Condensed Matter Physics (http://cnx.org/content/
m58591/latest/) .) The theory considers pairs of electrons and how they are coupled together through lattice-vibration
interactions.Throughtheinteractionswiththecrystallinelattice,electronsneartheFermienergylevelfeelasmallattractive

418 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
force and form pairs ( Cooper pairs), and the coupling is known as a phonon interaction. Single electrons are fermions,
which are particles that obey the Pauli exclusion principle. The Pauli exclusion principle in quantum mechanics states
that twoidentical fermions (particles withhalf-integer spin)cannot occupythesame quantum state simultaneously.Each
electronhasfourquantumnumbers (n, l, m l, m s).Theprincipalquantumnumber(n)describestheenergyoftheelectron,
the orbital angular momentum quantum number (l) indicates the most probable distance from the nucleus, the magnetic
quantumnumber (m l) describestheenergylevelsinthesubshell,andtheelectronspinquantumnumber (m s) describes
the orientation of the spin of the electron, either up or down. As the material enters a superconducting state, pairs of
electrons act more like bosons, which can condense into the same energy level and need not obey the Pauli exclusion
principle. The electron pairs have a slightly lower energy and leave an energy gap above them on the order of 0.001 eV.
This energy gap inhibits collision interactions that lead to ordinary resistivity. When the material is below the critical
temperature, the thermal energy is less than the band gap and the material exhibits zero resistivity.
Material Symbol or Formula Critical Temperature Critical Type
T (K) Magnetic Field
c
H (T)
c
Elements
Lead Pb 7.19 0.08 I
Lanthanum La (α) 4.90 − (β) 6.30 I
Tantalum Ta 4.48 0.09 I
Mercury Hg (α) 4.15 − (β) 3.95 0.04 I
Tin Sn 3.72 0.03 I
Indium In 3.40 0.03 I
Thallium Tl 2.39 0.03 I
Rhenium Re 2.40 0.03 I
Thorium Th 1.37 0.013 I
Protactinium Pa 1.40 I
Aluminum Al 1.20 0.01 I
Gallium Ga 1.10 0.005 I
Zinc Zn 0.86 0.014 I
Titanium Ti 0.39 0.01 I
Uranium U (α) 0.68 − (β) 1.80 I
Cadmium Cd 11.4 4.00 I
Compounds
Niobium-germanium Nb Ge 23.20 37.00 II
3
Niobium-tin Nb Sn 18.30 30.00 II
3
Niobium-nitrite NbN 16.00 II
Niobium-titanium NbTi 10.00 15.00 II
High-Temperature Oxides
HgBa CaCu O 134.00 II
2 2 8
Tl Ba Ca Cu O 125.00 II
2 2 2 3 10
YBa Cu O 92.00 120.00 II
2 3 7
Table 9.3Superconductor Critical Temperatures
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 419
Applications of Superconductors
Superconductors can be used to make superconducting magnets. These magnets are 10 times stronger than the strongest
electromagnets. These magnets are currently in use in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which produces high-quality
images of the body interior without dangerous radiation.
Another interesting application of superconductivity is the SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device). A
SQUIDisaverysensitivemagnetometerusedtomeasureextremelysubtlemagneticfields.TheoperationoftheSQUID
is based on superconducting loops containing Josephson junctions. A Josephson junction is the result of a theoretical
predictionmadebyB.D.Josephsoninanarticlepublishedin1962.Inthearticle,Josephsondescribedhowasupercurrent
canflowbetweentwopiecesofsuperconductorseparatedbyathinlayerofinsulator.Thisphenomenonisnowcalledthe
Josephsoneffect.TheSQUIDconsistsofasuperconductingcurrentloopcontainingtwoJosephsonjunctions,asshownin
Figure 9.29.Whentheloopisplacedinevenaveryweakmagneticfield,thereisaninterferenceeffectthatdependson
the strength of the magnetic field.
Figure 9.29 The SQUID (superconducting quantum interference
device) uses a superconducting current loop and two Josephson
junctions to detect magnetic fields as low as 10−14 T (Earth’s
magnet field is on the order of 0.3×10 −5 T).
Superconductivityisafascinatingandusefulphenomenon.Atcriticaltemperaturesneartheboilingpointofliquidnitrogen,
superconductivityhasspecialapplicationsinMRIs,particleaccelerators,andhigh-speedtrains.Willwereachastatewhere
wecanhavematerialsenterthesuperconductingphaseatnearroomtemperatures?Itseemsalongwayoff,butifscientists
in 1911 were asked if we would reach liquid-nitrogen temperatures with a ceramic, they might have thought it implausible.

420 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
CHAPTER 9 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
ampere (amp) SI unit for current; 1A=1C/s
circuit complete path that an electrical current travels along
conventional current currentthatflowsthroughacircuitfromthepositiveterminalofabatterythroughthecircuitto
the negative terminal of the battery
critical temperature temperature at which a material reaches superconductivity
current density flow of charge through a cross-sectional area divided by the area
diode nonohmic circuit device that allows current flow in only one direction
drift velocity velocity of a charge as it moves nearly randomly through a conductor, experiencing multiple collisions,
averagedoveralengthofaconductor,whosemagnitudeisthelengthofconductortraveleddividedbythetimeit
takes for the charges to travel the length
electrical conductivity measure of a material’s ability to conduct or transmit electricity
electrical current dQ
rate at which charge flows, I =
dt
electrical power time rate of change of energy in an electric circuit
Josephson junction junction of two pieces of superconducting material separated by a thin layer of insulating
material, which can carry a supercurrent
Meissner effect phenomenon that occurs in a superconducting material where all magnetic fields are expelled
nonohmic type of a material for which Ohm’s law is not valid
ohm (Ω) unit of electrical resistance, 1Ω =1V/A
ohmic typeofamaterialforwhichOhm’slawisvalid,thatis,thevoltagedropacrossthedeviceisequaltothecurrent
times the resistance
Ohm’s law empiricalrelationstatingthatthecurrentIisproportionaltothepotentialdifferenceV;itisoftenwrittenas
V =IR, whereRis the resistance
resistance electric property that impedes current; for ohmic materials, it is the ratio of voltage to current, R=V/I
resistivity intrinsic property of a material, independent of its shape or size, directly proportional to the resistance,
denoted by ρ
schematic graphicalrepresentationofacircuitusingstandardizedsymbolsforcomponentsandsolidlinesforthewire
connecting the components
SQUID (SuperconductingQuantumInterferenceDevice)devicethatisaverysensitivemagnetometer,usedtomeasure
extremely subtle magnetic fields
superconductivity phenomenon that occurs in some materials where the resistance goes to exactly zero and all
magnetic fields are expelled, which occurs dramatically at some low critical temperature ⎛T ⎞
⎝ C⎠
KEY EQUATIONS
Average electrical current ΔQ
I ave = Δt
Definition of an ampere 1A=1C/s
Electrical current dQ
I =
dt
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 421
Drift velocity I
v d=
nqA
Current density → →
I = ∬ J ·d A
area
Resistivity E
ρ=
J
Common expression of Ohm’s law V =IR
Resistivity as a function of temperature ρ= ρ ⎡1+α⎛T−T ⎞⎤
0⎣ ⎝ 0⎠⎦
Definition of resistance V
R≡
I
Resistance of a cylinder of material L
R= ρ
A
Temperature dependence of resistance R=R (1+αΔT)
0
Electric power P=IV
Power dissipated by a resistor
P=I2R=
V2
R
SUMMARY
9.1Electrical Current
ΔQ
• The average electrical current I ave is the rate at which charge flows, given by I ave = Δt , where ΔQ is the
amount of charge passing through an area in time Δt.
• Theinstantaneouselectricalcurrent,orsimplythecurrentI,istherateatwhichchargeflows.Takingthelimitas
dQ dQ
the change in time approaches zero, we have I = , where is the time derivative of the charge.
dt dt
• Thedirectionofconventionalcurrentistakenasthedirectioninwhichpositivechargemoves.Inasimpledirect-
current (DC) circuit, this will be from the positive terminal of the battery to the negative terminal.
• The SI unit for current is the ampere, or simply the amp (A), where 1A=1C/s.
• Current consists of the flow of free charges, such as electrons, protons, and ions.
9.2Model of Conduction in Metals
• The current through a conductor depends mainly on the motion of free electrons.
• Whenanelectricalfieldisappliedtoaconductor,thefreeelectronsinaconductordonotmovethroughaconductor
ataconstantspeedanddirection;instead,themotionisalmostrandomduetocollisionswithatomsandotherfree
electrons.
• Eventhoughtheelectronsmoveinanearlyrandomfashion,whenanelectricalfieldisappliedtotheconductor,the
overall velocity of the electrons can be defined in terms of a drift velocity.
• The current density is a vector quantity defined as the current through an infinitesimal area divided by the area.
→ →
• The current can be found from the current density, I = ∬ J ·d A .
area
• An incandescent light bulb is a filament of wire enclosed in a glass bulb that is partially evacuated. Current runs
through the filament, where the electrical energy is converted to light and heat.