# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 704-710
############################################################

692 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.37 (a) If fluid flow in a tube has negligible resistance, the speed is the same all across the tube. (b) When a viscous fluid flows
through a tube, its speed at the walls is zero, increasing steadily to its maximum at the center of the tube. (c) The shape of a Bunsen burner
flame is due to the velocity profile across the tube. (credit c: modification of work by "jasonwoodhead23"/Flickr)
The resistance R to laminar flow of an incompressible fluid with viscosity through a horizontal tube of uniform
radius r and length l, is given by
14.18
This equation is called Poiseuille’s law for resistance, named after the French scientist J. L. Poiseuille
(1799–1869), who derived it in an attempt to understand the flow of blood through the body.
Let us examine Poiseuille’s expression for R to see if it makes good intuitive sense. We see that resistance is directly
proportional to both fluid viscosity and the length l of a tube. After all, both of these directly affect the amount of
friction encountered—the greater either is, the greater the resistance and the smaller the flow. The radius r of a tube
affects the resistance, which again makes sense, because the greater the radius, the greater the flow (all other
factors remaining the same). But it is surprising that r is raised to the fourth power in Poiseuille’s law. This exponent
means that any change in the radius of a tube has a very large effect on resistance. For example, doubling the radius
of a tube decreases resistance by a factor of .
Taken together, and give the following expression for flow rate:
14.19
This equation describes laminar flow through a tube. It is sometimes called Poiseuille’s law for laminar flow, or
simply Poiseuille’s law (Figure 14.38).
FIGURE 14.38 Poiseuille’s law applies to laminar flow of an incompressible fluid of viscosity through a tube of length l and radius r. The
direction of flow is from greater to lower pressure. Flow rate Q is directly proportional to the pressure difference , and inversely
Access for free at openstax.org

14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 693
proportional to the length l of the tube and viscosity of the fluid. Flow rate increases with radius by a factor of .
EXAMPLE 14.8
Using Flow Rate: Air Conditioning Systems
An air conditioning system is being designed to supply air at a gauge pressure of 0.054 Pa at a temperature of
The air is sent through an insulated, round conduit with a diameter of 18.00 cm. The conduit is 20-meters long and
is open to a room at atmospheric pressure 101.30 kPa. The room has a length of 12 meters, a width of 6 meters,
and a height of 3 meters. (a) What is the volume flow rate through the pipe, assuming laminar flow? (b) Estimate the
length of time to completely replace the air in the room. (c) The builders decide to save money by using a conduit
with a diameter of 9.00 cm. What is the new flow rate?
Strategy
Assuming laminar flow, Poiseuille’s law states that
We need to compare the conduit radius before and after the flow rate reduction. Note that we are given the diameter
of the conduit, so we must divide by two to get the radius.
Solution
a. Assuming a constant pressure difference and using the viscosity ,
b. Assuming constant flow
c. Using laminar flow, Poiseuille’s law yields
Thus, the radius of the conduit decreases by half reduces the flow rate to 6.25% of the original value.
Significance
In general, assuming laminar flow, decreasing the radius has a more dramatic effect than changing the length. If the
length is increased and all other variables remain constant, the flow rate is decreased:
Doubling the length cuts the flow rate to one-half the original flow rate.
If the radius is decreased and all other variables remain constant, the volume flow rate decreases by a much larger
factor.

694 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Cutting the radius in half decreases the flow rate to one-sixteenth the original flow rate.
Flow and Resistance as Causes of Pressure Drops
Water pressure in homes is sometimes lower than normal during times of heavy use, such as hot summer days. The
drop in pressure occurs in the water main before it reaches individual homes. Let us consider flow through the water
main as illustrated in Figure 14.39. We can understand why the pressure to the home drops during times of
heavy use by rearranging the equation for flow rate:
In this case, is the pressure at the water works and R is the resistance of the water main. During times of heavy
use, the flow rate Q is large. This means that must also be large. Thus must decrease. It is correct to
think of flow and resistance as causing the pressure to drop from to . The equation is valid for
both laminar and turbulent flows.
FIGURE 14.39 During times of heavy use, there is a significant pressure drop in a water main, and supplied to users is significantly less
than created at the water works. If the flow is very small, then the pressure drop is negligible, and .
We can also use to analyze pressure drops occurring in more complex systems in which the tube
radius is not the same everywhere. Resistance is much greater in narrow places, such as in an obstructed coronary
artery. For a given flow rate Q, the pressure drop is greatest where the tube is most narrow. This is how water
faucets control flow. Additionally, R is greatly increased by turbulence, and a constriction that creates turbulence
greatly reduces the pressure downstream. Plaque in an artery reduces pressure and hence flow, both by its
resistance and by the turbulence it creates.
Measuring Turbulence
An indicator called the Reynolds number can reveal whether flow is laminar or turbulent. For flow in a tube of
uniform diameter, the Reynolds number is defined as
14.20
where is the fluid density, v its speed, its viscosity, and r the tube radius. The Reynolds number is a
dimensionless quantity. Experiments have revealed that is related to the onset of turbulence. For below
about 2000, flow is laminar. For above about 3000, flow is turbulent.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 695
For values of between about 2000 and 3000, flow is unstable—that is, it can be laminar, but small obstructions
and surface roughness can make it turbulent, and it may oscillate randomly between being laminar and turbulent. In
fact, the flow of a fluid with a Reynolds number between 2000 and 3000 is a good example of chaotic behavior. A
system is defined to be chaotic when its behavior is so sensitive to some factor that it is extremely difficult to
predict. It is difficult, but not impossible, to predict whether flow is turbulent or not when a fluid’s Reynold’s number
falls in this range due to extremely sensitive dependence on factors like roughness and obstructions on the nature of
the flow. A tiny variation in one factor has an exaggerated (or nonlinear) effect on the flow.
EXAMPLE 14.9
Using Flow Rate: Turbulent Flow or Laminar Flow
In Example 14.8, we found the volume flow rate of an air conditioning system to be This
calculation assumed laminar flow. (a) Was this a good assumption? (b) At what velocity would the flow become
turbulent?
Strategy
To determine if the flow of air through the air conditioning system is laminar, we first need to find the velocity, which
can be found by
Then we can calculate the Reynold’s number, using the equation below, and determine if it falls in the range for
laminar flow
Solution
a. Using the values given:
Since the Reynolds number is 1835 < 2000, the flow is laminar and not turbulent. The assumption that the
flow was laminar is valid.
b. To find the maximum speed of the air to keep the flow laminar, consider the Reynold’s number.
Significance
When transferring a fluid from one point to another, it desirable to limit turbulence. Turbulence results in wasted
energy, as some of the energy intended to move the fluid is dissipated when eddies are formed. In this case, the air
conditioning system will become less efficient once the velocity exceeds 0.16 m/s, since this is the point at which
turbulence will begin to occur.

696 14 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
absolute pressure sum of gauge pressure and hydrostatic equilibrium state at which water is not
atmospheric pressure flowing, or is static
Archimedes’ principle buoyant force on an object ideal fluid fluid with negligible viscosity
equals the weight of the fluid it displaces laminar flow type of fluid flow in which layers do not
Bernoulli’s equation equation resulting from mix
applying conservation of energy to an Pascal’s principle change in pressure applied to an
incompressible frictionless fluid: enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished to all
throughout the fluid portions of the fluid and to the walls of its container
Bernoulli’s principle Bernoulli’s equation applied at Poiseuille’s law rate of laminar flow of an
constant depth:
incompressible fluid in a tube:
Poiseuille’s law for resistance resistance to laminar
flow of an incompressible fluid in a tube:
buoyant force net upward force on any object in any
pressure force per unit area exerted perpendicular to
fluid due to the pressure difference at different
the area over which the force acts
depths
Reynolds number dimensionless parameter that can
density mass per unit volume of a substance or
reveal whether a particular flow is laminar or
object
turbulent
flow rate abbreviated Q, it is the volume V that flows
specific gravity ratio of the density of an object to a
past a particular point during a time t, or
fluid (usually water)
fluids liquids and gases; a fluid is a state of matter
turbulence fluid flow in which layers mix together via
that yields to shearing forces
eddies and swirls
gauge pressure pressure relative to atmospheric
turbulent flow type of fluid flow in which layers mix
pressure
together via eddies and swirls
hydraulic jack simple machine that uses cylinders of
viscosity measure of the internal friction in a fluid
different diameters to distribute force
Key Equations
Density of a sample at constant density
Pressure
Pressure at a depth h in a fluid of constant density
Change of pressure with height in a
constant-density fluid
Absolute pressure
Pascal’s principle
Volume flow rate
Continuity equation (constant density)
Continuity equation (general form)
Bernoulli’s equation
Viscosity
Poiseuille’s law for resistance
Poiseuille’s law
Access for free at openstax.org

14 • Chapter Review 697
Summary
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure displaces.
• A fluid is a state of matter that yields to sideways 14.5 Fluid Dynamics
or shearing forces. Liquids and gases are both
• Flow rate Q is defined as the volume V flowing
fluids. Fluid statics is the physics of stationary
past a point in time t, or where V is
fluids.
volume and t is time. The SI unit of flow rate is
• Density is the mass per unit volume of a
but other rates can be used, such as L/min.
substance or object, defined as The SI
• Flow rate and velocity are related by
unit of density is
where A is the cross-sectional area of the flow
• Pressure is the force per unit perpendicular area
and v is its average velocity.
over which the force is applied, The SI
• The equation of continuity states that for an
unit of pressure is the pascal: .
incompressible fluid, the mass flowing into a pipe
• Pressure due to the weight of a liquid of constant
must equal the mass flowing out of the pipe.
density is given by , where p is the
pressure, h is the depth of the liquid, is the 14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
density of the liquid, and g is the acceleration
• Bernoulli’s equation states that the sum on each
due to gravity.
side of the following equation is constant, or the
14.2 Measuring Pressure same at any two points in an incompressible
frictionless fluid:
• Gauge pressure is the pressure relative to
atmospheric pressure.
• Absolute pressure is the sum of gauge pressure
and atmospheric pressure. • Bernoulli’s principle is Bernoulli’s equation
• Open-tube manometers have U-shaped tubes applied to situations in which the height of the
and one end is always open. They are used to fluid is constant. The terms involving depth (or
measure pressure. A mercury barometer is a height h) subtract out, yielding
device that measures atmospheric pressure.
• The SI unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa), but
several other units are commonly used. • Bernoulli’s principle has many applications,
including entrainment and velocity
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
measurement.
• Pressure is force per unit area.
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
• A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid
is transmitted undiminished to all portions of the • Laminar flow is characterized by smooth flow of
fluid and to the walls of its container. the fluid in layers that do not mix.
• A hydraulic system is an enclosed fluid system • Turbulence is characterized by eddies and swirls
used to exert forces. that mix layers of fluid together.
• Fluid viscosity is due to friction within a fluid.
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
• Flow is proportional to pressure difference and
• Buoyant force is the net upward force on any inversely proportional to resistance:
object in any fluid. If the buoyant force is greater
than the object’s weight, the object will rise to
the surface and float. If the buoyant force is less
• The pressure drop caused by flow and resistance
than the object’s weight, the object will sink. If
is given by .
the buoyant force equals the object’s weight, the
• The Reynolds number can reveal whether
object can remain suspended at its present
flow is laminar or turbulent. It is .
depth. The buoyant force is always present and
acting on any object immersed either partially or • For below about 2000, flow is laminar. For
entirely in a fluid. above about 3000, flow is turbulent. For
• Archimedes’ principle states that the buoyant values of between 2000 and 3000, it may be
force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it either or both.