# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 179-185
############################################################

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 171
Figure 4.26 Because of the regularity that makes a crystal structure, one
crystal can have many families of planes within its geometry, each one giving
rise to X-ray diffraction.
4.7 | Holography
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how a three-dimensional image is recorded as a hologram
• Describe how a three-dimensional image is formed from a hologram
A hologram, such as the one in Figure 4.27, is a true three-dimensional image recorded on film by lasers. Holograms
areusedforamusement;decorationonnoveltyitemsandmagazinecovers;securityoncreditcardsanddriver’slicenses(a
laserandotherequipmentareneededtoreproducethem);andforseriousthree-dimensionalinformationstorage.Youcan
seethatahologramisatruethree-dimensionalimagebecauseobjectschangerelativepositionintheimagewhenviewed
from different angles.
Figure 4.27 Credit cards commonly have holograms for
logos, making them difficult to reproduce. (credit: Dominic
Alves)
The name hologram means “entire picture” (from the Greek holo, as in holistic) because the image is three-dimensional.
Holography is the process of producing holograms and, although they are recorded on photographic film, the process is
quitedifferentfromnormalphotography.Holographyuseslightinterferenceorwaveoptics,whereasnormalphotography
uses geometric optics. Figure 4.28 shows one method of producing a hologram. Coherent light from a laser is split by
a mirror, with part of the light illuminating the object. The remainder, called the reference beam, shines directly on a
piece of film. Light scattered from the object interferes with the reference beam, producing constructive and destructive
interference. As a result, the exposed film looks foggy, but close examination reveals a complicated interference pattern
storedonit.Wheretheinterferencewasconstructive,thefilm(anegativeactually)isdarkened.Holographyissometimes
calledlens-lessphotography,becauseitusesthewavecharacteristicsoflight,ascontrastedtonormalphotography,which

172 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
uses geometric optics and requires lenses.
Figure 4.28 Production of a hologram. Single-wavelength
coherent light from a laser produces a well-defined interference
pattern on a piece of film. The laser beam is split by a partially
silvered mirror, with part of the light illuminating the object and
the remainder shining directly on the film. (credit: modification
of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)
Lightfallingonahologramcanformathree-dimensionalimageoftheoriginalobject.Theprocessiscomplicatedindetail,
butthebasicscanbeunderstood,asshowninFigure4.29,inwhichalaserofthesametypethatexposedthefilmisnow
usedtoilluminateit.Themyriadtinyexposedregionsofthefilmaredarkandblockthelight,whereaslessexposedregions
allow light to pass. The film thus acts much like a collection of diffraction gratings with various spacing patterns. Light
passingthroughthehologramisdiffractedinvariousdirections,producingbothrealandvirtualimagesoftheobjectused
toexposethefilm.Theinterferencepatternisthesameasthatproducedbytheobject.Movingyoureyetovariousplacesin
theinterferencepatterngivesyoudifferentperspectives,justaslookingdirectlyattheobjectwould.Theimagethuslooks
like the object and is three dimensional like the object.
Figure 4.29 A transmission hologram is one that produces real and
virtual images when a laser of the same type as that which exposed the
hologram is passed through it. Diffraction from various parts of the film
produces the same interference pattern that was produced by the object
that was used to expose it. (credit: modification of work by Mariana
Ruiz Villarreal)
ThehologramillustratedinFigure4.29isatransmissionhologram.Hologramsthatareviewedwithreflectedlight,such
asthewhitelighthologramsoncreditcards,arereflectionhologramsandaremorecommon.Whitelighthologramsoften
appearalittleblurrywithrainbowedges,becausethediffractionpatternsofvariouscolorsoflightareatslightlydifferent
locationsduetotheirdifferentwavelengths.Furtherusesofholographyincludealltypesofthree-dimensionalinformation
storage, such as of statues in museums, engineering studies of structures, and images of human organs.
Invented in the late 1940s by Dennis Gabor (1900–1970), who won the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 173
holographybecamefarmorepracticalwiththedevelopmentofthelaser.Sincelasersproducecoherentsingle-wavelength
light,theirinterferencepatternsaremorepronounced.Theprecisionissogreatthatitisevenpossibletorecordnumerous
holograms on a single piece of film by just changing the angle of the film for each successive image. This is how the
holograms that move as you walk by them are produced—a kind of lens-less movie.
Inasimilarway,inthemedicalfield,hologramshaveallowedcompletethree-dimensionalholographicdisplaysofobjects
fromastackofimages.Storingtheseimagesforfutureuseisrelativelyeasy.Withtheuseofanendoscope,high-resolution,
three-dimensional holographic images of internal organs and tissues can be made.

174 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
CHAPTER 4 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
Bragg planes families of planes within crystals that can give rise to X-ray diffraction
destructive interference for a single slit occurswhenthewidthoftheslitiscomparabletothewavelengthoflight
illuminating it
diffraction bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle
diffraction grating large number of evenly spaced parallel slits
diffraction limit fundamental limit to resolution due to diffraction
hologram three-dimensionalimagerecordedonfilmbylasers;thewordhologrammeansentirepicture(fromtheGreek
wordholo, as in holistic)
holography process of producing holograms with the use of lasers
missing order interference maximum that is not seen because it coincides with a diffraction minimum
Rayleigh criterion twoimagesarejust-resolvablewhenthecenterofthediffractionpatternofoneisdirectlyoverthe
first minimum of the diffraction pattern of the other
resolution ability, or limit thereof, to distinguish small details in images
two-slit diffraction pattern diffraction pattern of two slits of width D that are separated by a distance d is the
interference pattern of two point sources separated bydmultiplied by the diffraction pattern of a slit of widthD
width of the central peak angle between the minimum for m=1 and m=−1
X-ray diffraction technique that provides the detailed information about crystallographic structure of natural and
manufactured materials
KEY EQUATIONS
Destructive interference for a single slit Dsinθ=mλform= ±1, ±2, ±3, ...
Half phase angle
β=
ϕ
=
πDsinθ
2 λ
Field amplitude in the diffraction pattern sinβ
E=NΔE
0 β
Intensity in the diffraction pattern 2
⎛sinβ⎞
I =I
0⎝ β ⎠
Rayleigh criterion for circular apertures λ
θ=1.22
D
Bragg equation mλ=2dsinθ, m=1, 2, 3...
SUMMARY
4.1Single-Slit Diffraction
• Diffraction can send a wave around the edges of an opening or other obstacle.
• Asingleslitproducesaninterferencepatterncharacterizedbyabroadcentralmaximumwithnarroweranddimmer
maxima to the sides.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 175
4.2Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
• The intensity pattern for diffraction due to a single slit can be calculated using phasors as
2
⎛sinβ⎞
I =I ,
0⎝ β ⎠
where β=
ϕ
=
πDsinθ
,Dis the slit width, λ is the wavelength, and θ is the angle from the central peak.
2 λ
4.3Double-Slit Diffraction
• With real slits with finite widths, the effects of interference and diffraction operate simultaneously to form a
complicated intensity pattern.
• Relative intensities of interference fringes within a diffraction pattern can be determined.
• Missing orders occur when an interference maximum and a diffraction minimum are located together.
4.4Diffraction Gratings
• Adiffractiongratingconsistsofalargenumberofevenlyspacedparallelslitsthatproduceaninterferencepattern
similar to but sharper than that of a double slit.
• Constructiveinterferenceoccurswhen dsinθ=mλform=0, ±1, ±2, ..., wheredisthedistancebetween
the slits, θ is the angle relative to the incident direction, andmis the order of the interference.
4.5Circular Apertures and Resolution
• Diffraction limits resolution.
• TheRayleighcriterionstatesthattwoimagesarejustresolvablewhenthecenterofthediffractionpatternofoneis
directly over the first minimum of the diffraction pattern of the other.
4.6X-Ray Diffraction
• X-raysarerelativelyshort-wavelengthEMradiationandcanexhibitwavecharacteristicssuchasinterferencewhen
interacting with correspondingly small objects.
4.7Holography
• Holography is a technique based on wave interference to record and form three-dimensional images.
• Lasers offer a practical way to produce sharp holographic images because of their monochromatic and coherent
light for pronounced interference patterns.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
4. Whathappenstothediffraction pattern ofasingleslit
4.1Single-Slit Diffraction when the entire optical apparatus is immersed in water?
1. As the width of the slit producing a single-slit
diffraction pattern is reduced, how will the diffraction 5. In our study of diffraction by a single slit, we assume
pattern produced change? that the length of the slit is much larger than the width.
What happens to the diffraction pattern if these two
dimensions were comparable?
2. Compare interference and diffraction.
6. A rectangular slit is twice as wide as it is high. Is the
3. If you and a friend are on opposite sides of a hill,
centraldiffractionpeakwiderintheverticaldirectionorin
you can communicate with walkie-talkies but not with
the horizontal direction?
flashlights. Explain.

176 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
gained with a larger lens?
4.2Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
7. InEquation4.4,theparameter β lookslikeanangle 11. The distance between atoms in a molecule is about
but is not an angle that youcan measure with a protractor 10 −8 cm. Can visible light be used to “see” molecules?
in the physical world. Explain what β represents.
12. Abeamoflightalwaysspreadsout.Whycanabeam
notbecreatedwithparallelraystopreventspreading?Why
canlenses,mirrors,oraperturesnotbeusedtocorrectthe
4.3Double-Slit Diffraction
spreading?
8. Shown below is the central part of the interference
patternforapurewavelengthofredlightprojectedontoa
doubleslit.Thepatternisactuallyacombinationofsingle-
4.6X-Ray Diffraction
and double-slit interference. Note that the bright spots are
evenlyspaced.Isthisadouble-orsingle-slitcharacteristic? 13. Crystal lattices can be examined with X-rays but not
Note that some of the bright spots are dim on either side UV. Why?
ofthecenter.Isthisasingle-ordouble-slitcharacteristic?
Which is smaller, the slit width or the separation between
slits? Explain your responses. 4.7Holography
14. How can you tell that a hologram is a true three-
dimensional image and that those in three-dimensional
movies are not?
15. If a hologram is recorded using monochromatic light
(credit: PASCO) at one wavelength but its image is viewed at another
wavelength, say 10% shorter, what will you see? What
if it is viewed using light of exactly half the original
4.5Circular Apertures and Resolution wavelength?
9. Ishigher resolution obtained inamicroscope with red
or blue light? Explain your answer. 16. What image will one see if a hologram is recorded
usingmonochromaticlightbutitsimageisviewedinwhite
light? Explain.
10. Theresolvingpowerofrefractingtelescopeincreases
withthesizeofitsobjectivelens.Whatotheradvantageis
PROBLEMS
21. Find the wavelength of light that has its third
4.1Single-Slit Diffraction minimumatanangleof 48.6° whenitfallsonasingleslit
17. (a) At what angle is the first minimum for 550-nm of width 3.00µm.
light falling on a single slit of width 1.00µm ? (b) Will
there be a second minimum? 22. (a) Sodium vapor light averaging 589 nm in
wavelengthfallsonasingleslitofwidth 7.50µm.Atwhat
18. (a) Calculate the angle at which a 2.00-µm-wide angledoesitproducesitssecondminimum?(b)Whatisthe
slitproducesitsfirstminimumfor410-nmvioletlight.(b) highest-order minimum produced?
Where is the first minimum for 700-nm red light?
23. Consider a single-slit diffraction pattern for
19. (a) How wide is a single slit that produces its first λ=589nm, projected on a screen that is 1.00 m from
minimum for 633-nm light at an angle of 28.0° ? (b) At a slit of width 0.25 mm. How far from the center of the
what angle will the second minimum be? pattern are the centers of the first and second dark fringes?
20. (a) What is the width of a single slit that produces 24. (a) Find the angle between the first minima for the
itsfirstminimumat 60.0° for600-nmlight?(b)Findthe twosodiumvaporlines,whichhavewavelengthsof589.1
and 589.6 nm, when they fall upon a single slit of width
wavelength of light that has its first minimum at 62.0°.
2.00µm. (b) What is the distance between these minima
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9