# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 57-63
############################################################

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 49
61. Anarrowbeamofwhitelightentersaprismmadeof
crownglassata 45.0° incidentangle,asshownbelow.At
whatangles, θ and θ ,dothered(660nm)andviolet
R V
(410 nm) components of the light emerge from the prism?
1.7Polarization
1.5Dispersion 62. What angle is needed between the direction of
polarized light and the axis of a polarizing filter to cut its
54. (a)Whatistheratioofthespeedofredlighttoviolet
intensity in half?
lightindiamond,basedonTable1.2?(b)Whatisthisratio
in polystyrene? (c) Which is more dispersive?
63. The angle between the axes of two polarizing filters
is 45.0°. By how much does the second filter reduce the
55. A beam of white light goes from air into water at an
intensity of the light coming through the first?
incident angle of 75.0°. At what angles are the red (660
nm) and violet (410 nm) parts of the light refracted?
64. Twopolarizingsheets P and P areplacedtogether
1 2
56. Byhowmuchdothecriticalanglesforred(660nm) with their transmission axes oriented at an angle θ to
andviolet(410nm)lightdifferinadiamondsurroundedby each other. What is θ when only 25% of the maximum
air? transmitted light intensity passes through them?
57. (a) A narrow beam of light containing yellow (580 65. Suppose that in the preceding problem the light
nm) and green (550 nm) wavelengths goes from incidenton P isunpolarized.Atthedeterminedvalueof
1
polystyrenetoair,strikingthesurfaceata 30.0° incident
θ, what fraction of the incident light passes through the
angle. What is the angle between the colors when they
combination?
emerge? (b) How far would they have to travel to be
separated by 1.00 mm?
66. If you have completely polarized light of intensity
58. A parallel beam of light containing orange (610 nm)
150W/m2,whatwillitsintensitybeafterpassingthrough
and violet (410 nm) wavelengths goes from fused quartz a polarizing filter with its axis at an 89.0° angle to the
to water, striking the surface between them at a 60.0° light’s polarization direction?
incidentangle.Whatistheanglebetweenthetwocolorsin
water? 67. Whatanglewouldtheaxisofapolarizingfilterneed
to make with the direction of polarized light of intensity
59. Arayof610-nmlightgoesfromairintofusedquartz 1.00kW/m2 to reduce the intensity to 10.0W/m2?
atanincidentangleof 55.0°.Atwhatincidentanglemust
470 nm light enter flint glass to have the same angle of
68. At the end of Example 1.7, it was stated that the
refraction?
intensity of polarized light is reduced to 90.0% of its
originalvaluebypassingthroughapolarizingfilterwithits
60. A narrow beam of light containing red (660 nm) and
axis at an angle of 18.4° to the direction of polarization.
blue (470 nm) wavelengths travels from air through a
Verify this statement.
1.00-cm-thick flat piece of crown glass and back to air
again. The beam strikes at a 30.0° incident angle. (a) At
69. Showthatifyouhavethreepolarizingfilters,withthe
whatanglesdothetwocolorsemerge?(b)Bywhatdistance
are the red and blue separated when they emerge? secondatanangleof 45.0° tothefirstandthethirdatan
angleof 90.0° tothefirst,theintensityoflightpassedby

50 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
thefirstwillbereducedto 25.0% ofitsvalue.(Thisisin (b) through the combination? (c) Repeat your calculations
contrasttohavingonlythefirstandthird,whichreducesthe for part (b) for transmission-axis angles of 30.0° and
intensity tozero, sothat placing the second between them 90.0°, respectively.
increases the intensity of the transmitted light.)
72. It is found that when light traveling in water falls on
70. Three polarizing sheets are placed together such that a plastic block, Brewster’s angle is 50.0°. What is the
the transmission axis of the second sheet is oriented at
refractive index of the plastic?
25.0° to the axis of the first, whereas the transmission
axis of the third sheet is oriented at 40.0° (in the same 73. At what angle will light reflected from diamond be
sense)totheaxisofthefirst.Whatfractionoftheintensity completely polarized?
of an incident unpolarized beam is transmitted by the
combination?
74. What is Brewster’s angle for light traveling in water
that is reflected from crown glass?
71. In order to rotate the polarization axis of a beam of
linearly polarized light by 90.0°, a student places sheets
75. A scuba diver sees light reflected from the water’s
P 1 and P 2 with their transmission axes at 45.0° and surface. At what angle relative to the water’s surface will
90.0°,respectively,tothebeam’saxisofpolarization.(a) this light be completely polarized?
Whatfractionoftheincidentlightpassesthrough P and
1
ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS
76. Fromhismeasurements,Roemerestimatedthatittook
22 min for light to travel a distance equal to the diameter
ofEarth’sorbitaroundtheSun.(a)Usethisestimatealong
withtheknowndiameterofEarth’sorbittoobtainarough
valueofthespeedoflight.(b)Lightactuallytakes16.5min
totravelthisdistance.Usethistimetocalculatethespeed
of light.
77. Cornu performed Fizeau’s measurement of the speed
of light using a wheel of diameter 4.00 cm that contained
180 teeth. The distance from the wheel to the mirror was
22.9 km. Assuming he measured the speed of light
accurately, what was the angular velocity of the wheel?
78. Suppose you have an unknown clear substance
immersed in water, and you wish to identify it by finding
itsindexofrefraction.Youarrangetohaveabeamoflight
enteritatanangleof 45.0°,andyouobservetheangleof
refraction to be 40.3°. What is the index of refraction of
the substance and its likely identity? 80. Consideringthepreviousproblem,showthat θ isthe
3
sameasitwouldbeifthesecondmediumwerenotpresent.
79. Shownbelowisarayoflightgoingfromairthrough
crown glass into water, such as going into a fish tank.
81. At what angle is light inside crown glass completely
Calculate the amount the ray is displaced by the glass
polarized when reflected from water, as in a fish tank?
(Δx), giventhattheincidentangleis 40.0° andtheglass
is 1.00 cm thick.
82. Lightreflectedat 55.6° fromawindowiscompletely
polarized.Whatisthewindow’sindexofrefractionandthe
likely substance of which it is made?
83. (a)Lightreflectedat 62.5° fromagemstoneinaring
iscompletelypolarized.Canthegembeadiamond?(b)At
what angle would the light be completely polarized if the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 51
gem was in water? 87. Ifapolarizingfilterreducestheintensityofpolarized
lightto 50.0% ofitsoriginalvalue,byhowmucharethe
84. If θ isBrewster’sangleforlightreflectedfromthe electric and magnetic fields reduced?
b
top of an interface between two substances, and θ′ is
b 88. Supposeyouputontwopairsofpolarizingsunglasses
Brewster’sangleforlightreflectedfrombelow,provethat withtheiraxesatanangleof 15.0°.Howmuchlongerwill
θ +θ′ =90.0°. ittakethelighttodepositagivenamountofenergyinyour
b b
eyecomparedwithasinglepairofsunglasses?Assumethe
lenses are clear except for their polarizing characteristics.
85. Unreasonable results Suppose light travels from
water to another substance, with an angle of incidence of
89. (a) On a day when the intensity of sunlight is
10.0° and an angle of refraction of 14.9°. (a) What is
theindexofrefractionoftheothersubstance?(b)Whatis
1.00kW/m2,acircularlens0.200mindiameterfocuses
unreasonableaboutthisresult?(c)Whichassumptionsare light onto water in a black beaker. Two polarizing sheets
unreasonable or inconsistent? of plastic are placed in front of the lens with their axes at
an angle of 20.0°. Assuming the sunlight is unpolarized
86. Unreasonable results Light traveling from water to and the polarizers are 100% efficient, what is the initial
a gemstone strikes the surface at an angle of 80.0° and rateofheatingofthewaterin °C/s,assumingitis 80.0%
hasanangleofrefractionof 15.2°.(a)Whatisthespeed absorbed?Thealuminumbeakerhasamassof30.0grams
of light in the gemstone? (b) What is unreasonable about and contains 250 grams of water. (b) Do the polarizing
this result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or filters get hot? Explain.
inconsistent?
CHALLENGE PROBLEMS
90. Lightshowsstagedwithlasersusemovingmirrorsto at the angle of incidence θ for which the emerging beam
swingbeamsandcreatecolorfuleffects.Showthatalight hasanangleofrefraction θ attherightface.Showthatthe
rayreflectedfromamirrorchangesdirectionby 2θ when
index of refractionnof the glass prism is given by
the mirror is rotated by an angle θ.
sin1(α+ϕ)
n= 2
91. Consider sunlight entering Earth’s atmosphere at
sin1ϕ
2
sunrise and sunset—that is, at a 90.0° incident angle.
where ϕ isthevertexangleoftheprismand α istheangle
Taking the boundary between nearly empty space and the
atmosphere to be sudden, calculate the angle of refraction through which the beam has been deviated. If α=37.0°
for sunlight. This lengthens the time the Sun appears to andthebaseanglesoftheprismareeach 50.0°, whatis
be above the horizon, both at sunrise and sunset. Now
n?
construct a problem in which you determine the angle of
refraction for different models of the atmosphere, such as
variouslayersofvaryingdensity.Yourinstructormaywish
toguideyouonthelevelofcomplexitytoconsiderandon
how the index of refraction varies with air density.
92. Alightrayenteringanopticalfibersurroundedbyair
is first refracted and then reflected as shown below.Show
thatifthefiberismadefromcrownglass,anyincidentray
will be totally internally reflected.
94. Iftheapexangle ϕ inthepreviousproblemis 20.0°
and n=1.50, what is the value of α?
95. The light incident on polarizing sheet P is linearly
93. Alightrayfallsontheleftfaceofaprism(seebelow) 1

52 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
polarized at an angle of 30.0° with respect to the respect to P ?
1
transmission axis of P . Sheet P is placed so that its
1 2
axisisparalleltothepolarizationaxisoftheincidentlight, 96. Prove that if I is the intensity of light transmitted by
thatis,alsoat 30.0° withrespectto P .(a)Whatfraction two polarizing filters with axes at an angle θ and I′ is
1
oftheincidentlightpassesthrough P ?(b)Whatfraction the intensity when the axes are at an angle 90.0°−θ,
1
of the incident light is passed by the combination? (c) then I+I′=I , the original intensity. (Hint: Use the
0
By rotating P 2 , a maximum in transmitted intensity is trigonometric identities cos90.0°−θ=sinθ and
obtained. What is the ratio of this maximum intensity to
cos2 θ+sin2 θ=1.)
theintensityoftransmittedlightwhen P isat 30.0° with
2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 53
2 | GEOMETRIC OPTICS
AND IMAGE FORMATION
Figure 2.1 Cloud Gateis a public sculpture by Anish Kapoor located in Millennium Park in Chicago. Its stainless steel plates
reflect and distort images around it, including the Chicago skyline. Dedicated in 2006, it has become a popular tourist attraction,
illustrating how art can use the principles of physical optics to startle and entertain. (credit: modification of work by Dhilung
Kirat)
Chapter Outline
2.1Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
2.2Spherical Mirrors
2.3Images Formed by Refraction
2.4Thin Lenses
2.5The Eye
2.6The Camera
2.7The Simple Magnifier
2.8Microscopes and Telescopes
Introduction
Thischapterintroducesthemajorideasofgeometricoptics,whichdescribetheformationofimagesduetoreflectionand
refraction.Itiscalled“geometric”opticsbecausetheimagescanbecharacterizedusinggeometricconstructions,suchas
raydiagrams.Wehaveseenthatvisiblelightisanelectromagneticwave;however,itswavenaturebecomesevidentonly
whenlightinteractswithobjectswithdimensionscomparabletothewavelength(about500nmforvisiblelight).Therefore,
the laws of geometric optics only apply to light interacting with objects much larger than the wavelength of the light.

54 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
2.1 | Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how an image is formed by a plane mirror.
• Distinguish between real and virtual images.
• Find the location and characterize the orientation of an image created by a plane mirror.
Youonlyhavetolookasfarasthenearestbathroomtofindanexampleofanimageformedbyamirror.Imagesinaplane
mirrorarethesamesizeastheobject,arelocatedbehindthemirror,andareorientedinthesamedirectionastheobject
(i.e., “upright”).
To understand how this happens, consider Figure 2.2. Two rays emerge from point P, strike the mirror, and reflect into
theobserver’seye.Notethatweusethelawofreflectiontoconstructthereflectedrays.Ifthereflectedraysareextended
backwardbehindthemirror(seedashedlinesinFigure2.2),theyseemtooriginatefrompointQ.Thisiswheretheimage
ofpointPislocated.Ifwerepeatthisprocessforpoint P′,weobtainitsimageatpoint Q′.Youshouldconvinceyourself
byusingbasicgeometrythattheimageheight(thedistancefromQto Q′)isthesameastheobjectheight(thedistance
fromPto P′). By forming images of all points of the object, we obtain an upright image of the object behind the mirror.
Figure 2.2 Two light rays originating from pointPon an object are reflected by a flat mirror
into the eye of an observer. The reflected rays are obtained by using the law of reflection.
Extending these reflected rays backward, they seem to come from pointQbehind the mirror,
which is where the virtual image is located. Repeating this process for point P′ gives the
image point Q′. The image height is thus the same as the object height, the image is upright,
and the object distance d is the same as the image distance d . (credit: modification of work
o i
by Kevin Dufendach)
Noticethatthereflectedraysappeartotheobservertocomedirectlyfromtheimagebehindthemirror.Inreality,theserays
comefromthepointsonthemirrorwheretheyarereflected.Theimagebehindthemirroriscalledavirtualimagebecause
itcannotbeprojectedontoascreen—theraysonlyappeartooriginatefromacommonpointbehindthemirror.Ifyouwalk
behind the mirror, you cannot see the image, because the rays do not go there. However, in front of the mirror, the rays
behave exactly as if they come from behind the mirror, so that is where the virtual image is located.
Laterinthischapter,wediscussrealimages;arealimagecanbeprojectedontoascreenbecausetheraysphysicallygo
through the image. You can certainly see both real and virtual images. The difference is that a virtual image cannot be
projected onto a screen, whereas a real image can.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9