# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 267-272
############################################################

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 259
Figure 6.10 Kinetic energy of photoelectrons at the surface
versus the frequency of incident radiation. The photoelectric
effect can only occur above the cut-off frequency f c.
Measurements for all metal surfaces give linear plots with one
slope. Each metal surface has its own cut-off frequency.
The Work Function
Thephotoelectriceffectwasexplainedin1905byA.Einstein.EinsteinreasonedthatifPlanck’shypothesisaboutenergy
quantawascorrectfordescribingtheenergyexchangebetweenelectromagneticradiationandcavitywalls,itshouldalso
worktodescribeenergyabsorptionfromelectromagneticradiationbythesurfaceofaphotoelectrode.Hepostulatedthatan
electromagneticwavecarriesitsenergyindiscretepackets.Einstein’spostulategoesbeyondPlanck’shypothesisbecauseit
states that the light itself consists of energy quanta. In other words, it states that electromagnetic waves are quantized.
InEinstein’sapproach,abeamofmonochromaticlightoffrequencyfismadeofphotons.Aphotonisaparticleoflight.
Each photon moves at the speed of light and carries an energy quantum E f. A photon’s energy depends only on its
frequencyf. Explicitly, theenergy of a photonis
E
f
=hf (6.13)
where h isPlanck’sconstant.Inthephotoelectriceffect,photonsarriveatthemetalsurfaceandeachphotongivesaway
allofitsenergytoonlyoneelectrononthemetalsurface.Thistransferofenergyfromphotontoelectronisofthe“allor
nothing”type,andtherearenofractionaltransfersinwhichaphotonwouldloseonlypartofitsenergyandsurvive.The
essenceofaquantumphenomenoniseitheraphotontransfersitsentireenergyandceasestoexistorthereisnotransfer
at all. This is in contrast with the classical picture, where fractional energy transfers are permitted. Having this quantum
understanding, the energy balance for an electron on the surface that receives the energy E from a photon is
f
E
f
=K max+ϕ
where K isthekineticenergy,givenbyEquation 6.12,thatanelectronhasattheveryinstantitgetsdetachedfrom
max
thesurface.Inthisenergybalanceequation, ϕ istheenergyneededtodetachaphotoelectronfromthesurface.Thisenergy
ϕ iscalledtheworkfunctionofthemetal.Eachmetalhasitscharacteristicworkfunction,asillustratedinTable6.1.To
obtainthekineticenergyofphotoelectronsatthesurface,wesimplyinverttheenergybalanceequationanduseEquation
6.13toexpresstheenergyoftheabsorbedphoton.Thisgivesustheexpressionforthekineticenergyofphotoelectrons,
which explicitly depends on the frequency of incident radiation:
K max=hf −ϕ. (6.14)
Thisequationhasasimplemathematicalformbutitsphysicsisprofound.Wecannowelaborateonthephysicalmeaning
behindEquation 6.14.

260 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
Typical Values of the Work Function for Some Common Metals
Metal ϕ (eV)
Na 2.46
Al 4.08
Pb 4.14
Zn 4.31
Fe 4.50
Cu 4.70
Ag 4.73
Pt 6.35
Table 6.1
In Einstein’s interpretation, interactions take place between individual electrons and individual photons. The absence of
a lag time means that these one-on-one interactions occur instantaneously. This interaction time cannot be increased by
loweringthelightintensity.Thelightintensitycorrespondstothenumberofphotonsarrivingatthemetalsurfaceperunit
time.Evenatverylowlightintensities,thephotoelectriceffectstilloccursbecausetheinteractionisbetweenoneelectron
andonephoton.Aslongasthereisatleastonephotonwithenoughenergytotransferittoaboundelectron,aphotoelectron
will appear on the surface of the photoelectrode.
The existence of the cut-off frequency f for the photoelectric effect follows from Equation 6.14 because the kinetic
c
energy K ofthephotoelectroncantakeonlypositivevalues.Thismeansthattheremustbesomethresholdfrequency
max
for which the kinetic energy is zero, 0=hf c−ϕ. In this way, we obtain the explicit formula for cut-off frequency:
ϕ (6.15)
f c=
h
.
Cut-offfrequencydependsonlyontheworkfunctionofthemetalandisindirectproportiontoit.Whentheworkfunction
islarge(whenelectronsareboundfasttothemetalsurface),theenergyofthethresholdphotonmustbelargetoproducea
photoelectron,andthenthecorrespondingthresholdfrequencyislarge.Photonswithfrequencieslargerthanthethreshold
frequency f c always produce photoelectrons because they have K max>0. Photons with frequencies smaller than f c
donothaveenoughenergytoproducephotoelectrons.Therefore,whenincidentradiationhasafrequencybelowthecut-
off frequency, the photoelectric effect is not observed. Because frequency f and wavelength λ of electromagnetic waves
are related by the fundamental relation λf =c (where c is the speed of light in vacuum), the cut-off frequency has its
correspondingcut-off wavelength λ c:
c c hc (6.16)
λ c=
f
c
=
ϕ/h
=
ϕ
.
Inthisequation, hc=1240eV·nm. Ourobservationscanberestatedinthefollowingequivalentway:Whentheincident
radiation has wavelengths longer than the cut-off wavelength, the photoelectric effect does not occur.
Example 6.5
Photoelectric Effect for Silver
Radiation with wavelength 300 nm is incident on a silver surface. Will photoelectrons be observed?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 261
Strategy
Photoelectronscanbeejectedfromthemetalsurfaceonlywhentheincidentradiationhasashorterwavelength
thanthecut-offwavelength.Theworkfunctionofsilveris ϕ=4.73eV (Table6.1).Tomaketheestimate,we
useEquation 6.16.
Solution
The threshold wavelength for observing the photoelectric effect in silver is
λ c= h
ϕ
c = 124
4
0
.7
e
3
V
eV
·nm =262nm.
The incident radiation has wavelength 300 nm, which is longer than the cut-off wavelength; therefore,
photoelectrons are not observed.
Significance
If the photoelectrode were made of sodium instead of silver, the cut-off wavelength would be 504 nm and
photoelectrons would be observed.
Equation 6.14inEinstein’smodeltellsusthatthemaximumkineticenergyofphotoelectronsisalinearfunctionofthe
frequency of incident radiation, which is illustrated in Figure 6.10. For any metal, the slope of this plot has a value of
Planck’sconstant.Theinterceptwiththe K -axisgivesusavalueoftheworkfunctionthatischaracteristicforthemetal.
max
Ontheotherhand, K
max
canbedirectlymeasuredintheexperimentbymeasuringthevalueofthestoppingpotential ΔV
s
(seeEquation6.12)atwhichthephotocurrentstops.Thesedirectmeasurementsallowustodetermineexperimentallythe
value of Planck’s constant, as well as work functions of materials.
Einstein’smodelalsogivesastraightforwardexplanationforthephotocurrentvaluesshowninFigure 6.9.Forexample,
doubling the intensity of radiation translates to doubling the number of photons that strike the surface per unit time. The
larger the number of photons, the larger is the number of photoelectrons, which leads to a larger photocurrent in the
circuit. This is how radiation intensity affects the photocurrent. The photocurrent must reach a plateau at some value of
potentialdifferencebecause,inunittime,thenumberofphotoelectronsisequaltothenumberofincidentphotonsandthe
numberofincidentphotonsdoesnotdependontheappliedpotentialdifferenceatall,butonlyontheintensityofincident
radiation.Thestoppingpotentialdoesnotchangewiththeradiationintensitybecausethekineticenergyofphotoelectrons
(seeEquation 6.14) does not depend on the radiation intensity.
Example 6.6
Work Function and Cut-Off Frequency
Whena180-nmlightisusedinanexperimentwithanunknownmetal,themeasuredphotocurrentdropstozero
at potential – 0.80 V. Determine the work function of the metal and its cut-off frequency for the photoelectric
effect.
Strategy
Tofindthecut-offfrequency f c, weuseEquation6.15,butfirstwemustfindtheworkfunction ϕ. Tofind
ϕ, weuseEquation 6.12andEquation 6.14.Photocurrentdropstozeroatthestoppingvalueofpotential,
so we identify ΔV s=0.8V.
Solution
We useEquation 6.12to find the kinetic energy of the photoelectrons:
K max=eΔV s=e(0.80V)=0.80eV.
Now we solveEquation 6.14for ϕ:
ϕ=hf −K max= h
λ
c −K max= 124
1
0
80
eV
nm
·nm −0.80eV=6.09eV.

262 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
Finally, we useEquation 6.15to find the cut-off frequency:
ϕ
f c=
h
= 6.09
−
eV
15
=1.47×10 −15 Hz.
4.136×10 eV·s
Significance
Incalculationsliketheoneshowninthisexample,itisconvenienttousePlanck’sconstantintheunitsof eV·s
and express all energies in eV instead of joules.
Example 6.7
The Photon Energy and Kinetic Energy of Photoelectrons
A 430-nm violet light is incident on a calcium photoelectrode with a work function of 2.71 eV.
Find the energy of the incident photons and the maximum kinetic energy of ejected electrons.
Strategy
Theenergyoftheincidentphotonis E
f
=hf =hc/λ, whereweuse fλ=c. Toobtainthemaximumenergy
of the ejected electrons, we useEquation 6.16.
Solution
E f = h λ c = 124 4 0 30 eV nm ·nm =2.88eV, K max=E f −ϕ=2.88eV−2.71eV=0.17eV
Significance
In this experimental setup, photoelectrons stop flowing at the stopping potential of 0.17 V.
6.6 CheckYourUnderstandingAyellow589-nmlightisincidentonasurfacewhoseworkfunctionis1.20
eV. What is the stopping potential? What is the cut-off wavelength?
6.7 Check Your Understanding Cut-off frequency for the photoelectric effect in some materials is
8.0×10 13 Hz. Whentheincidentlighthasafrequencyof 1.2×1014Hz, thestoppingpotentialismeasured
as–0.16V.EstimateavalueofPlanck’sconstantfromthesedata(inunits J·s and eV·s)anddeterminethe
percentage error of your estimation.
6.3 | The Compton Effect
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe Compton’s experiment
• Explain the Compton wavelength shift
• Describe how experiments with X-rays confirm the particle nature of radiation
Two of Einstein’s influential ideas introduced in 1905 were the theory of special relativity and the concept of a light
quantum, which we now call a photon. Beyond 1905, Einstein went further to suggest that freely propagating
electromagnetic waves consisted of photons that are particles of light in the same sense that electrons or other massive
particlesareparticlesofmatter.Abeamofmonochromaticlightofwavelength λ (orequivalently,offrequencyf)canbe
seeneitherasaclassicalwaveorasacollectionofphotonsthattravelinavacuumwithonespeed,c(thespeedoflight),
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 263
andallcarryingthesameenergy, E
f
=hf. Thisideaprovedusefulforexplainingtheinteractionsoflightwithparticles
of matter.
Momentum of a Photon
Unlikeaparticleofmatterthatischaracterizedbyitsrestmass m , aphotonismassless.Inavacuum,unlikeaparticle
0
ofmatterthatmayvaryitsspeedbutcannotreachthespeedoflight,aphotontravelsatonlyonespeed,whichisexactly
thespeedoflight.FromthepointofviewofNewtonianclassicalmechanics,thesetwocharacteristicsimplythataphoton
shouldnotexistatall.Forexample,howcanwefindthelinearmomentumorkineticenergyofabodywhosemassiszero?
Thisapparentparadoxvanishesifwedescribeaphotonasarelativisticparticle.Accordingtothetheoryofspecialrelativity,
any particle in nature obeys the relativistic energy equation
E2= p2c2+m2c4. (6.17)
0
Thisrelationcanalsobeappliedtoaphoton.InEquation6.17,Eisthetotalenergyofaparticle,pisitslinearmomentum,
and m is its rest mass. For a photon, we simply set m =0 in this equation. This leads to the expression for the
0 0
momentum p of a photon
f
E (6.18)
f
p f = c .
Here the photon’s energy E is the same as that of a light quantum of frequency f, which we introduced to explain the
f
photoelectric effect:
hc (6.19)
E f =hf = λ .
The wave relation that connects frequencyfwith wavelength λ and speedcalso holds for photons:
λf =c (6.20)
Therefore,aphotoncanbeequivalentlycharacterizedbyeitheritsenergyandwavelength,oritsfrequencyandmomentum.
Equation 6.19 and Equation 6.20 can be combined into the explicit relation between a photon’s momentum and its
wavelength:
h (6.21)
p f = λ .
Notice that this equation gives us only the magnitude of the photon’s momentum and contains no information about the
direction in which the photon is moving. To include the direction, it is customary to write the photon’s momentum as a
vector:
→ → (6.22)
p f =ℏ k .
In Equation 6.22, ℏ=h/2π is the reduced Planck’s constant (pronounced “h-bar”), which is just Planck’s constant