# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 231-238
############################################################

5.5 • Newton’s Third Law 219
between components of a system cancel because they are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. For
example, the force exerted by the professor on the cart results in an equal and opposite force back on the professor.
In this case, both forces act on the same system and therefore cancel. Thus, internal forces (between components
of a system) cancel. Choosing System 1 was crucial to solving this problem.
EXAMPLE 5.11
Force on the Cart: Choosing a New System
Calculate the force the professor exerts on the cart in Figure 5.20, using data from the previous example if needed.
Strategy
If we define the system of interest as the cart plus the equipment (System 2 in Figure 5.20), then the net external
force on System 2 is the force the professor exerts on the cart minus friction. The force she exerts on the cart, ,
is an external force acting on System 2. was internal to System 1, but it is external to System 2 and thus enters
Newton’s second law for this system.
Solution
Newton’s second law can be used to find We start with
The magnitude of the net external force on System 2 is
We solve for , the desired quantity:
The value of f is given, so we must calculate net That can be done because both the acceleration and the mass
of System 2 are known. Using Newton’s second law, we see that
where the mass of System 2 is 19.0 kg ( ) and its acceleration was found to be in
the previous example. Thus,
Now we can find the desired force:
Significance
This force is significantly less than the 150-N force the professor exerted backward on the floor. Not all of that
150-N force is transmitted to the cart; some of it accelerates the professor. The choice of a system is an important
analytical step both in solving problems and in thoroughly understanding the physics of the situation (which are not
necessarily the same things).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.7
Two blocks are at rest and in contact on a frictionless surface as shown below, with and
applied force 24 N. (a) Find the acceleration of the system of blocks. (b) Suppose that the blocks are later separated.
What force will give the second block, with the mass of 6.0 kg, the same acceleration as the system of blocks?

220 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
INTERACTIVE
View this video (https://openstax.org/l/21actionreact) to watch examples of action and reaction.
INTERACTIVE
View this video (https://openstax.org/l/21NewtonsLaws) to watch examples of Newton’s laws and internal and
external forces.
5.6 Common Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define normal and tension forces
• Distinguish between real and fictitious forces
• Apply Newton’s laws of motion to solve problems involving a variety of forces
Forces are given many names, such as push, pull, thrust, and weight. Traditionally, forces have been grouped into
several categories and given names relating to their source, how they are transmitted, or their effects. Several of
these categories are discussed in this section, together with some interesting applications. Further examples of
forces are discussed later in this text.
A Catalog of Forces: Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces
A catalog of forces will be useful for reference as we solve various problems involving force and motion. These
forces include normal force, tension, friction, and spring force.
Normal force
Weight (also called the force of gravity) is a pervasive force that acts at all times and must be counteracted to keep
an object from falling. You must support the weight of a heavy object by pushing up on it when you hold it stationary,
as illustrated in Figure 5.21(a). But how do inanimate objects like a table support the weight of a mass placed on
them, such as shown in Figure 5.21(b)? When the bag of dog food is placed on the table, the table sags slightly
under the load. This would be noticeable if the load were placed on a card table, but even a sturdy oak table
deforms when a force is applied to it. Unless an object is deformed beyond its limit, it will exert a restoring force
much like a deformed spring (or a trampoline or diving board). The greater the deformation, the greater the restoring
force. Thus, when the load is placed on the table, the table sags until the restoring force becomes as large as the
weight of the load. At this point, the net external force on the load is zero. That is the situation when the load is
stationary on the table. The table sags quickly and the sag is slight, so we do not notice it. But it is similar to the
sagging of a trampoline when you climb onto it.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.6 • Common Forces 221
FIGURE 5.21 (a) The person holding the bag of dog food must supply an upward force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction
to the weight of the food so that it doesn’t drop to the ground. (b) The card table sags when the dog food is placed on it, much like a stiff
trampoline. Elastic restoring forces in the table grow as it sags until they supply a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to
the weight of the load.
We must conclude that whatever supports a load, be it animate or not, must supply an upward force equal to the
weight of the load, as we assumed in a few of the previous examples. If the force supporting the weight of an object,
or a load, is perpendicular to the surface of contact between the load and its support, this force is defined as a
normal force and here is given by the symbol (This is not the newton unit for force, or N.) The word normal
means perpendicular to a surface. This means that the normal force experienced by an object resting on a horizontal
surface can be expressed in vector form as follows:
In scalar form, this becomes
The normal force can be less than the object’s weight if the object is on an incline.
EXAMPLE 5.12
Weight on an Incline
Consider the skier on the slope in Figure 5.22. Her mass including equipment is 60.0 kg. (a) What is her acceleration
if friction is negligible? (b) What is her acceleration if friction is 45.0 N?

222 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.22 Since the acceleration is parallel to the slope and acting down the slope, it is most convenient to project all forces onto a
coordinate system where one axis is parallel to the slope and the other is perpendicular to it (axes shown to the left of the skier). is
perpendicular to the slope and is parallel to the slope, but has components along both axes, namely, and . Here, has a
squiggly line to show that it has been replaced by these components. The force is equal in magnitude to , so there is no acceleration
perpendicular to the slope, but f is less than , so there is a downslope acceleration (along the axis parallel to the slope).
Strategy
This is a two-dimensional problem, since not all forces on the skier (the system of interest) are parallel. The
approach we have used in two-dimensional kinematics also works well here. Choose a convenient coordinate
system and project the vectors onto its axes, creating two one-dimensional problems to solve. The most convenient
coordinate system for motion on an incline is one that has one coordinate parallel to the slope and one
perpendicular to the slope. (Motions along mutually perpendicular axes are independent.) We use x and y for the
parallel and perpendicular directions, respectively. This choice of axes simplifies this type of problem, because
there is no motion perpendicular to the slope and the acceleration is downslope. Regarding the forces, friction is
drawn in opposition to motion (friction always opposes forward motion) and is always parallel to the slope, is
drawn parallel to the slope and downslope (it causes the motion of the skier down the slope), and is drawn as
the component of weight perpendicular to the slope. Then, we can consider the separate problems of forces parallel
to the slope and forces perpendicular to the slope.
Solution
The magnitude of the component of weight parallel to the slope is
and the magnitude of the component of the weight perpendicular to the slope is
a. Neglect friction. Since the acceleration is parallel to the slope, we need only consider forces parallel to the slope.
(Forces perpendicular to the slope add to zero, since there is no acceleration in that direction.) The forces parallel to
the slope are the component of the skier’s weight parallel to slope and friction f. Using Newton’s second law,
with subscripts to denote quantities parallel to the slope,
where assuming no friction for this part. Therefore,
Access for free at openstax.org

5.6 • Common Forces 223
is the acceleration.
b. Include friction. We have a given value for friction, and we know its direction is parallel to the slope and it opposes
motion between surfaces in contact. So the net external force is
Substituting this into Newton’s second law, gives
We substitute known values to obtain
This gives us
which is the acceleration parallel to the incline when there is 45.0 N of opposing friction.
Significance
Since friction always opposes motion between surfaces, the acceleration is smaller when there is friction than when
there is none. It is a general result that if friction on an incline is negligible, then the acceleration down the incline is
, regardless of mass. As discussed previously, all objects fall with the same acceleration in the absence of
air resistance. Similarly, all objects, regardless of mass, slide down a frictionless incline with the same acceleration
(if the angle is the same).
When an object rests on an incline that makes an angle with the horizontal, the force of gravity acting on the object
is divided into two components: a force acting perpendicular to the plane, , and a force acting parallel to the
plane, (Figure 5.23). The normal force is typically equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the
perpendicular component of the weight . The force acting parallel to the plane, , causes the object to
accelerate down the incline.
FIGURE 5.23 An object rests on an incline that makes an angle with the horizontal.
Be careful when resolving the weight of the object into components. If the incline is at an angle to the horizontal,
then the magnitudes of the weight components are

224 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
and
We use the second equation to write the normal force experienced by an object resting on an inclined plane:
object at rest or sliding on an inclined plane. Instead of memorizing these equations, it is helpful to be able to
determine them from reason. To do this, we draw the right angle formed by the three weight vectors. The angle of
the incline is the same as the angle formed between w and . Knowing this property, we can use trigonometry to
determine the magnitude of the weight components:
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.8
A force of 1150 N acts parallel to a ramp to push a 250-kg gun safe into a moving van. The ramp is frictionless and
inclined at (a) What is the acceleration of the safe up the ramp? (b) If we consider friction in this problem, with
a friction force of 120 N, what is the acceleration of the safe?
Tension
A tension is a force along the length of a medium; in particular, it is a pulling force that acts along a stretched
flexible connector, such as a rope or cable. The word “tension” comes from a Latin word meaning “to stretch.” Not
coincidentally, the flexible cords that carry muscle forces to other parts of the body are called tendons.
Any flexible connector, such as a string, rope, chain, wire, or cable, can only exert a pull parallel to its length; thus, a
force carried by a flexible connector is a tension with a direction parallel to the connector. Tension is a pull in a
connector. Consider the phrase: “You can’t push a rope.” Instead, tension force pulls outward along the two ends of
a rope.
Consider a person holding a mass on a rope, as shown in Figure 5.24. If the 5.00-kg mass in the figure is stationary,
then its acceleration is zero and the net force is zero. The only external forces acting on the mass are its weight and
the tension supplied by the rope. Thus,
where T and w are the magnitudes of the tension and weight, respectively, and their signs indicate direction, with up
being positive. As we proved using Newton’s second law, the tension equals the weight of the supported mass:
object hanging at rest. Thus, for a 5.00-kg mass (neglecting the mass of the rope), we see that
If we cut the rope and insert a spring, the spring would extend a length corresponding to a force of 49.0 N, providing
a direct observation and measure of the tension force in the rope.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.6 • Common Forces 225
FIGURE 5.24 When a perfectly flexible connector (one requiring no force to bend it) such as this rope transmits a force that force must
be parallel to the length of the rope, as shown. By Newton’s third law, the rope pulls with equal force but in opposite directions on the hand
and the supported mass (neglecting the weight of the rope). The rope is the medium that carries the equal and opposite forces between the
two objects. The tension anywhere in the rope between the hand and the mass is equal. Once you have determined the tension in one
location, you have determined the tension at all locations along the rope.
Flexible connectors are often used to transmit forces around corners, such as in a hospital traction system, a
tendon, or a bicycle brake cable. If there is no friction, the tension transmission is undiminished; only its direction
changes, and it is always parallel to the flexible connector, as shown in Figure 5.25.
FIGURE 5.25 (a) Tendons in the finger carry force T from the muscles to other parts of the finger, usually changing the force’s direction but
not its magnitude (the tendons are relatively friction free). (b) The brake cable on a bicycle carries the tension T from the brake lever on the
handlebars to the brake mechanism. Again, the direction but not the magnitude of T is changed.
EXAMPLE 5.13
What Is the Tension in a Tightrope?
Calculate the tension in the wire supporting the 70.0-kg tightrope walker shown in Figure 5.26.