# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 198-202
############################################################

186 4 • Chapter Review
t = 0, its position and velocity are zero. (a) What horizontally?
are the particle’s position and velocity as
4.3 Projectile Motion
functions of time? (b) Find the equation of the
path of the particle. Draw the x- and y-axes and 33 . A bullet is shot horizontally from shoulder height
sketch the trajectory of the particle. (1.5 m) with an initial speed 200 m/s. (a) How
much time elapses before the bullet hits the
28 . A boat leaves the dock at t = 0 and heads out
ground? (b) How far does the bullet travel
into a lake with an acceleration of A
horizontally?
strong wind is pushing the boat, giving it an
additional velocity of (a) 34 . A marble rolls off a tabletop 1.0 m high and hits
What is the velocity of the boat at t = 10 s? (b) the floor at a point 3.0 m away from the table’s
What is the position of the boat at t = 10s? Draw edge in the horizontal direction. (a) How long is
a sketch of the boat’s trajectory and position at t the marble in the air? (b) What is the speed of
= 10 s, showing the x- and y-axes. the marble when it leaves the table’s edge? (c)
What is its speed when it hits the floor?
29 . The position of a particle for t > 0 is given by
(a) What 35 . A dart is thrown horizontally at a speed of 10 m/s at
is the velocity as a function of time? (b) What is the bull’s-eye of a dartboard 2.4 m away, as in the
the acceleration as a function of time? (c) What following figure. (a) How far below the intended
is the particle’s velocity at t = 2.0 s? (d) What is target does the dart hit? (b) What does your answer
its speed at t = 1.0 s and t = 3.0 s? (e) What is tell you about how proficient dart players throw their
the average velocity between t = 1.0 s and t = darts?
2.0 s?
30 . The acceleration of a particle is a constant. At t =
0 the velocity of the particle is
At t = 4 s the velocity is (a) What is the
particle’s acceleration? (b) How do the position
and velocity vary with time? Assume the particle
is initially at the origin.
31 . A particle has a position function
where the
arguments of the cosine and sine functions are
in radians. (a) What is the velocity vector? (b)
What is the acceleration vector?
32 . A Lockheed Martin F-35 II Lighting jet takes off
from an aircraft carrier with a runway length of
90 m and a takeoff speed 70 m/s at the end of
the runway. Jets are catapulted into airspace
from the deck of an aircraft carrier with two
sources of propulsion: the jet propulsion and the 36 . An airplane flying horizontally with a speed of 500
catapult. At the point of leaving the deck of the km/h at a height of 800 m drops a crate of supplies
aircraft carrier, the F-35’s acceleration (see the following figure). If the parachute fails to
decreases to a constant acceleration of open, how far in front of the release point does the
at with respect to the horizontal. (a) What is crate hit the ground?
the initial acceleration of the F-35 on the deck of
the aircraft carrier to make it airborne? (b) Write
the position and velocity of the F-35 in unit
vector notation from the point it leaves the deck
of the aircraft carrier. (c) At what altitude is the
fighter 5.0 s after it leaves the deck of the
aircraft carrier? (d) What is its velocity and speed
at this time? (e) How far has it traveled
Access for free at openstax.org

4 • Chapter Review 187
43 . An athlete can jump a distance of 8.0 m in the
broad jump. What is the maximum distance the
athlete can jump on the Moon, where the
gravitational acceleration is one-sixth that of
Earth?
44 . The maximum horizontal distance a boy can
throw a ball is 50 m. Assume he can throw with
the same initial speed at all angles. How high
does he throw the ball when he throws it straight
upward?
45 . A rock is thrown off a cliff at an angle of with
37 . Suppose the airplane in the preceding problem respect to the horizontal. The cliff is 100 m high.
fires a projectile horizontally in its direction of The initial speed of the rock is 30 m/s. (a) How
motion at a speed of 300 m/s relative to the high above the edge of the cliff does the rock
plane. (a) How far in front of the release point rise? (b) How far has it moved horizontally when
does the projectile hit the ground? (b) What is its it is at maximum altitude? (c) How long after the
speed when it hits the ground? release does it hit the ground? (d) What is the
range of the rock? (e) What are the horizontal
38 . A fastball pitcher can throw a baseball at a
and vertical positions of the rock relative to the
speed of 40 m/s (90 mi/h). (a) Assuming the
edge of the cliff at t = 2.0 s, t = 4.0 s, and t = 6.0
pitcher can release the ball 16.7 m from home
s?
plate so the ball is moving horizontally, how long
does it take the ball to reach home plate? (b) 46 . Trying to escape his pursuers, a secret agent skis off
How far does the ball drop between the pitcher’s a slope inclined at below the horizontal at 60
hand and home plate? km/h. To survive and land on the snow 100 m below,
he must clear a gorge 60 m wide. Does he make it?
39 . A projectile is launched at an angle of and
Ignore air resistance.
lands 20 s later at the same height as it was
launched. (a) What is the initial speed of the
projectile? (b) What is the maximum altitude? (c)
What is the range? (d) Calculate the
displacement from the point of launch to the
position on its trajectory at 15 s.
40 . A basketball player shoots toward a basket 6.1
m away and 3.0 m above the floor. If the ball is
released 1.8 m above the floor at an angle of
above the horizontal, what must the initial speed
be if it were to go through the basket?
41 . At a particular instant, a hot air balloon is 100 m
in the air and descending at a constant speed of
2.0 m/s. At this exact instant, a girl throws a ball
horizontally, relative to herself, with an initial
speed of 20 m/s. When she lands, where will she
find the ball? Ignore air resistance. 47 . A golfer on a fairway is 70 m away from the
green, which sits below the level of the fairway
42 . A man on a motorcycle traveling at a uniform
by 20 m. If the golfer hits the ball at an angle of
speed of 10 m/s throws an empty can straight
with an initial speed of 20 m/s, how close to
upward relative to himself with an initial speed
the green does she come?
of 3.0 m/s. Find the equation of the trajectory as
seen by a police officer on the side of the road. 48 . A projectile is shot at a hill, the base of which is 300
Assume the initial position of the can is the point m away. The projectile is shot at above the
where it is thrown. Ignore air resistance. horizontal with an initial speed of 75 m/s. The hill
can be approximated by a plane sloped at to the

188 4 • Chapter Review
horizontal. Relative to the coordinate system shown ball at a distance 10 m from the goal at an angle
in the following figure, the equation of this straight of The ball hits the crossbar at the top of
line is Where on the hill does the goal. What is the initial speed of the soccer
the projectile land? ball?
56 . Olympus Mons on Mars is the largest volcano in
the solar system, at a height of 25 km and with a
radius of 312 km. If you are standing on the
summit, with what initial velocity would you
have to fire a projectile from a cannon
horizontally to clear the volcano and land on the
surface of Mars? Note that Mars has an
acceleration of gravity of
57 . In 1999, Robbie Knievel was the first to jump the
49 . An astronaut on Mars kicks a soccer ball at an
Grand Canyon on a motorcycle. At a narrow part
angle of with an initial velocity of 15 m/s. If
of the canyon (69.0 m wide) and traveling 35.8
the acceleration of gravity on Mars is ,
m/s off the takeoff ramp, he reached the other
(a) what is the range of the soccer kick on a flat
side. What was his launch angle?
surface? (b) What would be the range of the
same kick on the Moon, where gravity is one- 58 . You throw a baseball at an initial speed of 15.0
sixth that of Earth? m/s at an angle of with respect to the
horizontal. What would the ball’s initial speed
50 . Mike Powell holds the record for the long jump
have to be at on a planet that has twice the
of 8.95 m, established in 1991. If he left the
acceleration of gravity as Earth to achieve the
ground at an angle of what was his initial
same range? Consider launch and impact on a
speed?
horizontal surface.
51 . MIT’s robot cheetah can jump over obstacles 46
59 . Aaron Rodgers throws a football at 20.0 m/s to
cm high and has speed of 12.0 km/h. (a) If the
his wide receiver, who is running straight down
robot launches itself at an angle of at this
the field at 9.4 m/s. If Aaron throws the football
speed, what is its maximum height? (b) What
when the wide receiver is 10.0 m in front of him,
would the launch angle have to be to reach a
(a) at what angle does Aaron have to launch the
height of 46 cm?
ball so the ball will be at the same height as the
52 . Mt. Asama, Japan, is an active volcano. In 2009, receiver when the receiver makes it to 20.0 m in
an eruption threw solid volcanic rocks that front of Aaron? (b) Will the receiver be able to
landed 1 km horizontally from the crater. If the catch the ball?
volcanic rocks were launched at an angle of
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
with respect to the horizontal and landed 900 m
below the crater, (a) what would be their initial 60 . A flywheel is rotating at 30 rev/s. What is the
velocity and (b) what is their time of flight? total angle, in radians, through which a point on
the flywheel rotates in 40 s?
53 . Drew Brees of the New Orleans Saints can throw
a football 23.0 m/s (50 mph). If he angles the 61 . A particle travels in a circle of radius 10 m at a
throw at from the horizontal, what distance constant speed of 20 m/s. What is the
does it go if it is to be caught at the same magnitude of the acceleration?
elevation as it was thrown?
62 . Cam Newton of the Carolina Panthers throws a
54 . The Lunar Roving Vehicle used in NASA’s late perfect football spiral at 8.0 rev/s. The radius of
Apollo missions reached an unofficial lunar land a pro football is 8.5 cm at the middle of the short
speed of by astronaut Eugene Cernan. If side. What is the centripetal acceleration of the
the rover was moving at this speed on a flat laces on the football?
lunar surface and hit a small bump that
63 . A fairground ride spins its occupants inside a
projected it off the surface at an angle of
flying saucer-shaped container. If the horizontal
how long would it be “airborne” on the Moon?
circular path the riders follow has an 8.00-m
55 . A soccer goal is 2.44 m high. A player kicks the radius, at how many revolutions per minute are
Access for free at openstax.org

4 • Chapter Review 189
the riders subjected to a centripetal acceleration 71 . The velocity of a particle in reference frame A is
equal to that of gravity? The velocity of reference
frame A with respect to reference frame B is
64 . A runner taking part in the 200-m dash must run
and the velocity of reference frame B
around the end of a track that has a circular arc
with respect to C is What is the velocity
with a radius of curvature of 30.0 m. The runner
of the particle in reference frame C?
starts the race at a constant speed. If she
completes the 200-m dash in 23.2 s and runs at 72 . Raindrops fall vertically at 4.5 m/s relative to the
constant speed throughout the race, what is her earth. What does an observer in a car moving at
centripetal acceleration as she runs the curved 22.0 m/s in a straight line measure as the
portion of the track? velocity of the raindrops?
65 . What is the acceleration of Venus toward the 73 . A seagull can fly at a velocity of 9.00 m/s in still
Sun, assuming a circular orbit? air. (a) If it takes the bird 20.0 min to travel 6.00
km straight into an oncoming wind, what is the
66 . An experimental jet rocket travels around Earth
velocity of the wind? (b) If the bird turns around
along its equator just above its surface. At what
and flies with the wind, how long will it take the
speed must the jet travel if the magnitude of its
bird to return 6.00 km?
acceleration is g?
74 . A ship sets sail from Rotterdam, heading due
67 . A fan is rotating at a constant 360.0 rev/min.
north at 7.00 m/s relative to the water. The local
What is the magnitude of the acceleration of a
ocean current is 1.50 m/s in a direction
point on one of its blades 10.0 cm from the axis
north of east. What is the velocity of the ship
of rotation?
relative to Earth?
68 . A point located on the second hand of a large
75 . A boat can be rowed at 8.0 km/h in still water.
clock has a radial acceleration of How
(a) How much time is required to row 1.5 km
far is the point from the axis of rotation of the
downstream in a river moving 3.0 km/h relative
second hand?
to the shore? (b) How much time is required for
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions the return trip? (c) In what direction must the
boat be aimed to row straight across the river?
69 . The coordinate axes of the reference frame
(d) Suppose the river is 0.8 km wide. What is the
remain parallel to those of , as moves away
velocity of the boat with respect to Earth and
from at a constant velocity
how much time is required to get to the opposite
(a) If at time t
shore? (e) Suppose, instead, the boat is aimed
= 0 the origins coincide, what is the position of
straight across the river. How much time is
the origin in the S frame as a function of
required to get across and how far downstream
time? (b) How is particle position for and
is the boat when it reaches the opposite shore?
as measured in S and respectively,
76 . A small plane flies at 200 km/h in still air. If the
related? (c) What is the relationship between
wind blows directly out of the west at 50 km/h,
particle velocities (d) How are
(a) in what direction must the pilot head her
accelerations related?
plane to move directly north across land and (b)
70 . The coordinate axes of the reference frame how long does it take her to reach a point 300
remain parallel to those of S, as moves away km directly north of her starting point?
from S at a constant velocity
77 . A cyclist traveling southeast along a road at 15
. (a) If at time
km/h feels a wind blowing from the southwest at
t = 0 the origins coincide, what is the position of
25 km/h. To a stationary observer, what are the
origin in the S frame as a function of time? (b)
speed and direction of the wind?
How is particle position for and , as
78 . A river is moving east at 4.0 m/s. A boat starts
measured in S and respectively, related? (c)
from the dock heading north of west at 7.0
What is the relationship between particle
m/s. If the river is 1800 m wide, (a) what is the
velocities (d) How are
velocity of the boat with respect to Earth and (b)
accelerations related?
how long does it take the boat to cross the river?