# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 57-63
############################################################

2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 45
FIGURE 2.6 Displacement vectors for a fishing trip. (a) Stopping to rest at point C while walking from camp (point A) to the pond (point B).
(b) Going back for the dropped tackle box (point D). (c) Finishing up at the fishing pond.
Suppose your friend departs from point A (the campsite) and walks in the direction to point B (the fishing pond), but,
along the way, stops to rest at some point C located three-quarters of the distance between A and B, beginning from
point A (Figure 2.6(a)). What is his displacement vector when he reaches point C? We know that if he walks all
the way to B, his displacement vector relative to A is , which has magnitude and a direction of
northeast. If he walks only a 0.75 fraction of the total distance, maintaining the northeasterly direction, at point C he
must be away from the campsite at A. So, his displacement vector at the rest point C has
magnitude and is parallel to the displacement vector . All of this can be stated
succinctly in the form of the following vector equation:
In a vector equation, both sides of the equation are vectors. The previous equation is an example of a vector
multiplied by a positive scalar (number) . The result, , of such a multiplication is a new vector with a
direction parallel to the direction of the original vector .
In general, when a vector is multiplied by a positive scalar , the result is a new vector that is parallel to :
2.1
The magnitude of this new vector is obtained by multiplying the magnitude of the original vector, as
expressed by the scalar equation:
2.2
In a scalar equation, both sides of the equation are numbers. Equation 2.2 is a scalar equation because the
magnitudes of vectors are scalar quantities (and positive numbers). If the scalar is negative in the vector equation
Equation 2.1, then the magnitude of the new vector is still given by Equation 2.2, but the direction of the new
vector is antiparallel to the direction of . These principles are illustrated in Figure 2.7(a) by two examples where
the length of vector is 1.5 units. When , the new vector has length (twice as
long as the original vector) and is parallel to the original vector. When , the new vector has length
(twice as long as the original vector) and is antiparallel to the original vector.

46 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.7 Algebra of vectors in one dimension. (a) Multiplication by a scalar. (b) Addition of two vectors is called the resultant of
vectors and . (c) Subtraction of two vectors is the difference of vectors and . (d) The difference between A and B can also be
drawn in tail-to-tail fashion, with the vectors slightly offset. The difference connects the head of the second (subtracted) vector to the head
of the first.
Now suppose your fishing buddy departs from point A (the campsite), walking in the direction to point B (the fishing
hole), but he realizes he lost his tackle box when he stopped to rest at point C (located three-quarters of the
distance between A and B, beginning from point A). So, he turns back and retraces his steps in the direction toward
the campsite and finds the box lying on the path at some point D only 1.2 km away from point C (see Figure 2.6(b)).
What is his displacement vector when he finds the box at point D? What is his displacement vector from
point D to the hole? We have already established that at rest point C his displacement vector is .
Starting at point C, he walks southwest (toward the campsite), which means his new displacement vector from
point C to point D is antiparallel to . Its magnitude is , so his second
displacement vector is . His total displacement relative to the campsite is the vector sum of
the two displacement vectors: vector (from the campsite to the rest point) and vector (from the rest
point to the point where he finds his box):
2.3
The vector sum of two (or more) vectors is called the resultant vector or, for short, the resultant. When the vectors
on the right-hand-side of Equation 2.3 are known, we can find the resultant as follows:
2.4
When your friend finally reaches the pond at B, his displacement vector from point A is the vector sum of his
displacement vector from point A to point D and his displacement vector from point D to the fishing hole:
(see Figure 2.6(c)). This means his displacement vector is the difference of two
vectors:
2.5
Notice that a difference of two vectors is nothing more than a vector sum of two vectors because the second term in
Equation 2.5 is vector (which is antiparallel to . When we substitute Equation 2.4 into Equation 2.5, we
obtain the second displacement vector:
2.6
Access for free at openstax.org

2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 47
This result means your friend walked from the point where he finds his
tackle box to the fishing hole.
When vectors and lie along a line (that is, in one dimension), such as in the camping example, their resultant
and their difference both lie along the same direction. We can illustrate the addition or
subtraction of vectors by drawing the corresponding vectors to scale in one dimension, as shown in Figure 2.7.
To illustrate the resultant when and are two parallel vectors, we draw them along one line by placing the origin
of one vector at the end of the other vector in head-to-tail fashion (see Figure 2.7(b)). The magnitude of this
resultant is the sum of their magnitudes: R = A + B. The direction of the resultant is parallel to both vectors. When
vector is antiparallel to vector , we can draw them along one line in head-to-head fashion (Figure 2.7(c)), tail-to-
tail fashion, or head-to-tail fashion. The magnitude of the vector difference, then, is the absolute value
of the difference of their magnitudes. The direction of the difference vector is parallel to the direction of the longer
vector.
In general, in one dimension—as well as in higher dimensions, such as in a plane or in space—we can add any
number of vectors and we can do so in any order because the addition of vectors is commutative,
2.7
and associative,
2.8
Moreover, multiplication by a scalar is distributive:
2.9
We used the distributive property in Equation 2.4 and Equation 2.6.
When adding many vectors in one dimension, it is convenient to use the concept of a unit vector. A unit vector,
which is denoted by a letter symbol with a hat, such as , has a magnitude of one and does not have any physical
unit so that . The only role of a unit vector is to specify direction. For example, instead of saying vector
has a magnitude of 6.0 km and a direction of northeast, we can introduce a unit vector that points to the
northeast and say succinctly that . Then the southwesterly direction is simply given by the unit
vector . In this way, the displacement of 6.0 km in the southwesterly direction is expressed by the vector
EXAMPLE 2.1
A Ladybug Walker
A long measuring stick rests against a wall in a physics laboratory with its 200-cm end at the floor. A ladybug lands
on the 100-cm mark and crawls randomly along the stick. It first walks 15 cm toward the floor, then it walks 56 cm
toward the wall, then it walks 3 cm toward the floor again. Then, after a brief stop, it continues for 25 cm toward the
floor and then, again, it crawls up 19 cm toward the wall before coming to a complete rest (Figure 2.8). Find the
vector of its total displacement and its final resting position on the stick.
Strategy
If we choose the direction along the stick toward the floor as the direction of unit vector , then the direction toward
the floor is and the direction toward the wall is . The ladybug makes a total of five displacements:

48 2 • Vectors
The total displacement is the resultant of all its displacement vectors.
FIGURE 2.8 Five displacements of the ladybug. Note that in this schematic drawing, magnitudes of displacements are not drawn to scale.
(credit "ladybug": modification of work by “Persian Poet Gal”/Wikimedia Commons)
Solution
The resultant of all the displacement vectors is
In this calculation, we use the distributive law given by Equation 2.9. The result reads that the total displacement
vector points away from the 100-cm mark (initial landing site) toward the end of the meter stick that touches the
wall. The end that touches the wall is marked 0 cm, so the final position of the ladybug is at the (100 – 32)cm =
68-cm mark.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.2
A cave diver enters a long underwater tunnel. When her displacement with respect to the entry point is 20 m, she
accidentally drops her camera, but she doesn’t notice it missing until she is some 6 m farther into the tunnel. She
swims back 10 m but cannot find the camera, so she decides to end the dive. How far from the entry point is she?
Taking the positive direction out of the tunnel, what is her displacement vector relative to the entry point?
Access for free at openstax.org

2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 49
Algebra of Vectors in Two Dimensions
When vectors lie in a plane—that is, when they are in two dimensions—they can be multiplied by scalars, added to
other vectors, or subtracted from other vectors in accordance with the general laws expressed by Equation 2.1,
Equation 2.2, Equation 2.7, and Equation 2.8. However, the addition rule for two vectors in a plane becomes more
complicated than the rule for vector addition in one dimension. We have to use the laws of geometry to construct
resultant vectors, followed by trigonometry to find vector magnitudes and directions. This geometric approach is
commonly used in navigation (Figure 2.9). In this section, we need to have at hand two rulers, a triangle, a
protractor, a pencil, and an eraser for drawing vectors to scale by geometric constructions.
FIGURE 2.9 In navigation, the laws of geometry are used to draw resultant displacements on nautical maps.
For a geometric construction of the sum of two vectors in a plane, we follow the parallelogram rule. Suppose two
vectors and are at the arbitrary positions shown in Figure 2.10. Translate either one of them in parallel to the
beginning of the other vector, so that after the translation, both vectors have their origins at the same point. Now, at
the end of vector we draw a line parallel to vector and at the end of vector we draw a line parallel to vector
(the dashed lines in Figure 2.10). In this way, we obtain a parallelogram. From the origin of the two vectors we draw
a diagonal that is the resultant of the two vectors: (Figure 2.10(a)). The other diagonal of this
parallelogram is the vector difference of the two vectors , as shown in Figure 2.10(b). Notice that the end
of the difference vector is placed at the end of vector .
FIGURE 2.10 The parallelogram rule for the addition of two vectors. Make the parallel translation of each vector to a point where their
origins (marked by the dot) coincide and construct a parallelogram with two sides on the vectors and the other two sides (indicated by
dashed lines) parallel to the vectors. (a) Draw the resultant vector along the diagonal of the parallelogram from the common point to the
opposite corner. Length R of the resultant vector is not equal to the sum of the magnitudes of the two vectors. (b) Draw the difference
vector along the diagonal connecting the ends of the vectors. Place the origin of vector at the end of vector and the end
(arrowhead) of vector at the end of vector . Length D of the difference vector is not equal to the difference of magnitudes of the two
vectors.

50 2 • Vectors
It follows from the parallelogram rule that neither the magnitude of the resultant vector nor the magnitude of the
difference vector can be expressed as a simple sum or difference of magnitudes A and B, because the length of a
diagonal cannot be expressed as a simple sum of side lengths. When using a geometric construction to find
magnitudes and , we have to use trigonometry laws for triangles, which may lead to complicated algebra.
There are two ways to circumvent this algebraic complexity. One way is to use the method of components, which we
examine in the next section. The other way is to draw the vectors to scale, as is done in navigation, and read
approximate vector lengths and angles (directions) from the graphs. In this section we examine the second
approach.
If we need to add three or more vectors, we repeat the parallelogram rule for the pairs of vectors until we find the
resultant of all of the resultants. For three vectors, for example, we first find the resultant of vector 1 and vector 2,
and then we find the resultant of this resultant and vector 3. The order in which we select the pairs of vectors does
not matter because the operation of vector addition is commutative and associative (see Equation 2.7 and Equation
2.8). Before we state a general rule that follows from repetitive applications of the parallelogram rule, let’s look at
the following example.
Suppose you plan a vacation trip in Florida. Departing from Tallahassee, the state capital, you plan to visit your uncle
Joe in Jacksonville, see your cousin Vinny in Daytona Beach, stop for a little fun in Orlando, see a circus performance
in Tampa, and visit the University of Florida in Gainesville. Your route may be represented by five displacement
vectors , , , and , which are indicated by the red vectors in Figure 2.11. What is your total displacement
when you reach Gainesville? The total displacement is the vector sum of all five displacement vectors, which may be
found by using the parallelogram rule four times. Alternatively, recall that the displacement vector has its beginning
at the initial position (Tallahassee) and its end at the final position (Gainesville), so the total displacement vector can
be drawn directly as an arrow connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville (see the green vector in Figure 2.11). When
we use the parallelogram rule four times, the resultant we obtain is exactly this green vector connecting
Tallahassee with Gainesville: .
Access for free at openstax.org