# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 75-81
############################################################

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 65
5780 K and that its emissivity is 1, find its radius.
CHALLENGE PROBLEMS
123. A pendulum is made of a rod of length L and equationtogetdL/dtmultipliedbya(verysimple)function
negligible mass, but capable of thermal expansion, and of L on one side, and integrate both sides with respect to
a weight of negligible size. (a) Show that when the time.Alternatively,youmaybeabletouseyourknowledge
temperature increases by dT, the period of the pendulum ofthederivativesofvariousfunctionstoguessthesolution,
increases by a fraction αLdT/2. (b) A clock controlled which has a simple dependence on t. (c) Will the water
byabrasspendulumkeepstimecorrectlyat 10°C.Ifthe eventually freeze to the bottom of the flask?
room temperature is 30°C, does the clock run faster or
128. As the very first rudiment of climatology, estimate
slower? What is its error in seconds per day?
thetemperatureofEarth.Assumeitisaperfectsphereand
its temperature is uniform. Ignore the greenhouse effect.
124. Attemperaturesofafewhundredkelvinsthespecific
ThermalradiationfromtheSunhasanintensity(the“solar
heat capacity of copper approximately follows the
constant”S)ofabout 1370W/m2 attheradiusofEarth’s
empirical formula c=α+βT+δT−2, where
orbit. (a) Assuming the Sun’s rays are parallel, what area
α=349J/kg·K, β=0.107J/kg·K2, and mustSbemultipliedbytogetthetotalradiationintercepted
by Earth? It will be easiest to answer in terms of Earth’s
δ=4.58×10 5 J·kg·K. How much heat is needed to
radius, R. (b) Assume that Earth reflects about 30% of
raise the temperature of a 2.00-kg piece of copper from the solar energy it intercepts. In other words, Earth has
20°C to 250°C? an albedo with a value of A=0.3. In terms of S, A,
and R, what is the rate at which Earth absorbs energy
125. Inacalorimeterofnegligibleheatcapacity,200gof from the Sun? (c) Find the temperature at which Earth
steam at 150°C and 100 g of ice at −40°C are mixed. radiatesenergyatthesamerate.Assumethatattheinfrared
wavelengths where it radiates, the emissivity e is 1. Does
The pressure is maintained at 1 atm. What is the final
your result show that the greenhouse effect is important?
temperature, and how much steam, ice, and water are
(d)HowdoesyouranswerdependonthetheareaofEarth?
present?
129. Let’s stop ignoring the greenhouse effect and
126. An astronaut performing an extra-vehicular activity
incorporate it into the previous problem in a very rough
(space walk) shaded from the Sun is wearing a spacesuit
way. Assume the atmosphere is a single layer, a spherical
thatcanbeapproximatedasperfectlywhite (e=0) except
shell around Earth, with an emissivity e=0.77 (chosen
for a 5cm×8cm patch in the form of the astronaut’s
simply to give the right answer) at infrared wavelengths
nationalflag.Thepatchhasemissivity0.300.Thespacesuit
emitted by Earth and by the atmosphere. However, the
under the patch is 0.500 cm thick, with a thermal
atmosphere is transparent to the Sun’s radiation (that is,
conductivity k=0.0600W/m°C,anditsinnersurfaceis
assume the radiation is at visible wavelengths with no
atatemperatureof 20.0°C.Whatisthetemperatureofthe infrared), so the Sun’s radiation reaches the surface. The
patch,andwhatistherateofheatlossthroughit?Assume greenhouse effect comes from the difference between the
the patch is so thin that its outer surface is at the same atmosphere’s transmission of visible light and its rather
temperature as the outer surface of the spacesuit under it. strong absorption of infrared. Note that the atmosphere’s
Alsoassumethetemperatureofouterspaceis0K.Youwill radius isnotsignificantly different fromEarth’s,butsince
get an equation that is very hard to solve in closed form, the atmosphere is a layer above Earth, it emits radiation
soyoucansolveitnumericallywithagraphingcalculator, both upward and downward, so it has twice Earth’s area.
with software, or even by trial and error with a calculator. There are three radiative energy transfers in this problem:
solar radiation absorbed by Earth’s surface; infrared
radiation from the surface, which is absorbed by the
127. The goal in this problem is to find the growth of
atmosphere according to its emissivity; and infrared
an ice layer as a function of time. Call the thickness of
radiation from the atmosphere, half of which is absorbed
the ice layer L. (a) Derive an equation for dL/dt in terms
by Earth and half of which goes out into space. Apply
of L , the temperature T above the ice, and the properties
themethodofthepreviousproblemtogetanequationfor
of ice (which you can leave in symbolic form instead of
Earth’ssurfaceandonefortheatmosphere,andsolvethem
substituting the numbers). (b) Solve this differential
forthetwounknowntemperatures,surfaceandatmosphere.
equationassumingthatat t=0,youhave L=0. Ifyou
have studied differential equations, you will know a
techniqueforsolvingequationsofthistype:manipulatethe

66 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
a. IntermsofEarth’sradius,theconstant σ,and
the unknown temperature T of the surface, what
s
is the power of the infrared radiation from the
surface?
b. WhatisthepowerofEarth’sradiationabsorbed
by the atmosphere?
c. Intermsoftheunknowntemperature T ofthe
e
atmosphere, what is the power radiated from the
atmosphere?
d. Write an equation that says the power of the
radiationtheatmosphereabsorbsfromEarthequals
the power of the radiation it emits.
e. Half of the power radiated by the atmosphere
hits Earth. Write an equation that says that the
power Earth absorbs from the atmosphere and the
Sun equals the power that it emits.
f. Solve your two equations for the unknown
temperature of Earth.
For steps that make this model less crude, see for
example the lectures
(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/
21paulgormlec)by Paul O’Gorman.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 2 | The Kinetic Theory of Gases 67
2 | THE KINETIC THEORY OF
GASES
Figure 2.1 A volcanic eruption releases tons of gas and dust into the atmosphere. Most of the gas is water vapor, but several
other gases are common, including greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and acidic pollutants such as sulfur dioxide.
However, the emission of volcanic gas is not all bad: Many geologists believe that in the earliest stages of Earth’s formation,
volcanic emissions formed the early atmosphere. (credit: modification of work by “Boaworm”/Wikimedia Commons)
Chapter Outline
2.1Molecular Model of an Ideal Gas
2.2Pressure, Temperature, and RMS Speed
2.3Heat Capacity and Equipartition of Energy
2.4Distribution of Molecular Speeds
Introduction
Gasesareliterallyallaroundus—theairthatwebreatheisamixtureofgases.Othergasesincludethosethatmakebreads
andcakessoft,thosethatmakedrinksfizzy,andthosethatburntoheatmanyhomes.Enginesandrefrigeratorsdependon
the behaviors of gases, as we will see in later chapters.
As we discussed in the preceding chapter, the study of heat and temperature is part of an area of physics known as
thermodynamics,inwhichwerequireasystemtobemacroscopic,thatis,toconsistofahugenumber(suchas 10 23)of
molecules.Webeginbyconsideringsomemacroscopicpropertiesofgases:volume,pressure,andtemperature.Thesimple
model ofahypothetical “ideal gas” describes these properties ofagas veryaccurately undermany conditions. Wemove
from the ideal gas model to a more widely applicable approximation, called the Van der Waals model.
Tounderstandgasesevenbetter,wemustalsolookatthemonthemicroscopicscaleofmolecules.Ingases,themolecules
interactweakly,sothemicroscopicbehaviorofgasesisrelativelysimple,andtheyserveasagoodintroductiontosystems
ofmanymolecules.Themolecularmodelofgasesiscalledthekinetictheoryofgasesandisoneoftheclassicexamplesof
a molecular model that explains everyday behavior.

68 Chapter 2 | The Kinetic Theory of Gases
2.1 | Molecular Model of an Ideal Gas
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply the ideal gas law to situations involving the pressure, volume, temperature, and the
number of molecules of a gas
• Use the unit of moles in relation to numbers of molecules, and molecular and macroscopic
masses
• Explain the ideal gas law in terms of moles rather than numbers of molecules
• Apply the van der Waals gas law to situations where the ideal gas law is inadequate
Inthissection,weexplorethethermalbehaviorofgases.Ourword“gas”comesfromtheFlemishwordmeaning“chaos,”
firstusedforvaporsbytheseventeenth-centurychemistJ.B.vanHelmont.Thetermwasmoreappropriatethanheknew,
becausegasesconsistofmoleculesmovingandcollidingwitheachotheratrandom.Thisrandomnessmakestheconnection
between the microscopic and macroscopic domains simpler for gases than for liquids or solids.
Howdogasesdifferfromsolidsandliquids?Underordinaryconditions,suchasthoseoftheairaroundus,thedifference
isthatthemoleculesofgasesaremuchfartherapartthanthoseofsolidsandliquids.Becausethetypicaldistancesbetween
moleculesarelargecomparedtothesizeofamolecule,asillustratedinFigure2.2,theforcesbetweenthemareconsidered
negligible, except when they come into contact with each other during collisions. Also, at temperatures well above the
boilingtemperature,themotionofmoleculesisfast,andthegasesexpandrapidlytooccupyalloftheaccessiblevolume.
Incontrast,inliquidsandsolids,moleculesareclosertogether,andthebehaviorofmoleculesinliquidsandsolidsishighly
constrainedbythemolecules’interactionswithoneanother.Themacroscopicpropertiesofsuchsubstancesdependstrongly
ontheforcesbetweenthemolecules,andsincemanymoleculesareinteracting,theresulting“many-bodyproblems”canbe
extremely complicated (seeCondensed Matter Physics (http://cnx.org/content/m58591/latest/)).
Figure 2.2 Atoms and molecules in a gas are typically widely
separated. Because the forces between them are quite weak at
these distances, the properties of a gas depend more on the
number of atoms per unit volume and on temperature than on
the type of atom.
The Gas Laws
Inthepreviouschapter,wesawoneconsequenceofthelargeintermolecularspacingingases:Gasesareeasilycompressed.
Table 1.2 shows that gases have larger coefficients of volume expansion than either solids or liquids. These large
coefficients mean that gases expand and contract very rapidly with temperature changes. We also saw (in the section on
thermal expansion) that most gases expand at the same rate or have the same coefficient of volume expansion, β. This
raisesaquestion:Whydoallgasesactinnearlythesameway,whenallthevariousliquidsandsolidshavewidelyvarying
expansion rates?
Tostudyhowthepressure,temperature,andvolumeofagasrelatetooneanother,considerwhathappenswhenyoupump
airintoadeflatedcartire.Thetire’svolumefirstincreasesindirectproportiontotheamountofairinjected,withoutmuch
increaseinthetirepressure.Oncethetirehasexpandedtonearlyitsfullsize,thetire’swallslimititsvolumeexpansion.
Ifwecontinuetopumpairintothetire,thepressureincreases.Whenthecarisdrivenandthetiresflex,theirtemperature
increases, and therefore the pressure increases even further (Figure 2.3).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 2 | The Kinetic Theory of Gases 69
Figure 2.3 (a) When air is pumped into a deflated tire, its volume first increases without much increase in pressure. (b) When
the tire is filled to a certain point, the tire walls resist further expansion, and the pressure increases with more air. (c) Once the
tire is inflated, its pressure increases with temperature.
Figure 2.4 shows data from the experiments of Robert Boyle (1627–1691), illustrating what is now called Boyle’s law:
Atconstanttemperatureandnumberofmolecules,theabsolutepressureofagasanditsvolumeareinverselyproportional.
(RecallfromFluidMechanics(http://cnx.org/content/m58624/latest/)thattheabsolutepressureisthetruepressure
andthegaugepressureistheabsolutepressureminustheambientpressure,typicallyatmosphericpressure.)Thegraphin
Figure 2.4displays this relationship as an inverse proportionality of volume to pressure.
Figure 2.4 Robert Boyle and his assistant found that volume and pressure are
inversely proportional. Here their data are plotted asVversus 1/p; the linearity of the
graph shows the inverse proportionality. The number shown as the volume is actually
the height in inches of air in a cylindrical glass tube. The actual volume was that
height multiplied by the cross-sectional area of the tube, which Boyle did not publish.
The data are from Boyle’s bookA Defence of the Doctrine Touching the Spring and
Weight of the Air…, p. 60.[1]
Figure2.5showsexperimentaldataillustratingwhatiscalledCharles’slaw,afterJacquesCharles(1746–1823).Charles’s
lawstatesthatatconstantpressureandnumberofmolecules,thevolumeofagasisproportionaltoitsabsolutetemperature.
1. http://bvpb.mcu.es/en/consulta/registro.cmd?id=406806

70 Chapter 2 | The Kinetic Theory of Gases
Figure 2.5 Experimental data showing that at constant pressure, volume is
approximately proportional to temperature. The best-fit line passes approximately
through the origin.[2]
SimilarisAmonton’sorGay-Lussac’slaw,whichstatesthatatconstantvolumeandnumberofmolecules,thepressureis
proportional to the temperature. That law is the basis of the constant-volume gas thermometer, discussed in the previous
chapter. (The histories of these laws and the appropriate credit for them are more complicated than can be discussed here.)
It is known experimentally that for gases at low density (such that their molecules occupy a negligible fraction of the
totalvolume)andattemperatureswellabovetheboilingpoint,theseproportionalitiesholdtoagoodapproximation.Not
surprisingly,withtheotherquantitiesheldconstant,eitherpressureorvolumeisproportionaltothenumberofmolecules.
More surprisingly, when the proportionalities are combined into a single equation, the constant of proportionality is
independentofthecompositionofthegas.Theresultingequationforallgasesappliesinthelimitoflowdensityandhigh
temperature; it’sthe same foroxygenasforhelium oruranium hexafluoride. Agasat that limit iscalled anideal gas;it
obeys theideal gas law, which is also called the equation of state of an ideal gas.
Ideal Gas Law
The ideal gas law states that
pV =Nk T, (2.1)
B
wherepistheabsolutepressureofagas,Visthevolumeitoccupies,Nisthenumberofmoleculesinthegas,andTis
its absolute temperature.
Theconstant k iscalledtheBoltzmannconstantinhonoroftheAustrianphysicistLudwigBoltzmann(1844–1906)and
B
has the value
k =1.38×10 −23 J/K.
B
Theidealgaslawdescribesthebehaviorofanyrealgaswhenitsdensityislowenoughoritstemperaturehighenoughthat
itisfarfromliquefaction.Thisencompassesmanypracticalsituations.Inthenextsection,we’llseewhyit’sindependent
of the type of gas.
Inmanysituations,theidealgaslawisappliedtoasampleofgaswithaconstantnumberofmolecules;forinstance,the
gasmaybeinasealedcontainer.IfNisconstant,thensolvingforNshowsthatpV/Tisconstant.Wecanwritethatfactin
a convenient form:
2. http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/history/charles.html
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9