# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 444-450
############################################################

432 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Equation 9.36 implies another important result: Since M represents the mass of the entire system of particles, it is
necessarily constant. (If it isn’t, we don’t have a closed system, so we can’t expect the system’s momentum to be
conserved.) As a result, Equation 9.36 implies that, for a closed system,
9.37
That is to say, in the absence of an external force, the velocity of the center of mass never changes.
You might be tempted to shrug and say, “Well yes, that’s just Newton’s first law,” but remember that Newton’s first
law discusses the constant velocity of a particle, whereas Equation 9.37 applies to the center of mass of a (possibly
vast) collection of interacting particles, and that there may not be any particle at the center of mass at all! So, this
really is a remarkable result.
EXAMPLE 9.19
Fireworks Display
When a fireworks rocket explodes, thousands of glowing fragments fly outward in all directions, and fall to Earth in
an elegant and beautiful display (Figure 9.31). Describe what happens, in terms of conservation of momentum and
center of mass.
FIGURE 9.31 These exploding fireworks are a vivid example of conservation of momentum and the motion of the center of mass.
The picture shows radial symmetry about the central points of the explosions; this suggests the idea of center of
mass. We can also see the parabolic motion of the glowing particles; this brings to mind projectile motion ideas.
Solution
Initially, the fireworks rocket is launched and flies more or less straight upward; this is the cause of the more-or-
less-straight, white trail going high into the sky below the explosion in the upper-right of the picture (the yellow
explosion). This trail is not parabolic because the explosive shell, during its launch phase, is actually a rocket; the
impulse applied to it by the ejection of the burning fuel applies a force on the shell during the rise-time interval.
(This is a phenomenon we will study in the next section.) The shell has multiple forces on it; thus, it is not in free-fall
prior to the explosion.
At the instant of the explosion, the thousands of glowing fragments fly outward in a radially symmetrical pattern.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.6 • Center of Mass 433
The symmetry of the explosion is the result of all the internal forces summing to zero for every
internal force, there is another that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
However, as we learned above, these internal forces cannot change the momentum of the center of mass of the
(now exploded) shell. Since the rocket force has now vanished, the center of mass of the shell is now a projectile
(the only force on it is gravity), so its trajectory does become parabolic. The two red explosions on the left show the
path of their centers of mass at a slightly longer time after explosion compared to the yellow explosion on the upper
right.
In fact, if you look carefully at all three explosions, you can see that the glowing trails are not truly radially
symmetric; rather, they are somewhat denser on one side than the other. Specifically, the yellow explosion and the
lower middle explosion are slightly denser on their right sides, and the upper-left explosion is denser on its left side.
This is because of the momentum of their centers of mass; the differing trail densities are due to the momentum
each piece of the shell had at the moment of its explosion. The fragment for the explosion on the upper left of the
picture had a momentum that pointed upward and to the left; the middle fragment’s momentum pointed upward
and slightly to the right; and the right-side explosion clearly upward and to the right (as evidenced by the white
rocket exhaust trail visible below the yellow explosion).
Finally, each fragment is a projectile on its own, thus tracing out thousands of glowing parabolas.
Significance
In the discussion above, we said, “…the center of mass of the shell is now a projectile (the only force on it is
gravity)….” This is not quite accurate, for there may not be any mass at all at the center of mass; in which case, there
could not be a force acting on it. This is actually just verbal shorthand for describing the fact that the gravitational
forces on all the particles act so that the center of mass changes position exactly as if all the mass of the shell were
always located at the position of the center of mass.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.13
How would the firework display change in deep space, far away from any source of gravity?
You may sometimes hear someone describe an explosion by saying something like, “the fragments of the exploded
object always move in a way that makes sure that the center of mass continues to move on its original trajectory.”
This makes it sound as if the process is somewhat magical: how can it be that, in every explosion, it always works
out that the fragments move in just the right way so that the center of mass’ motion is unchanged? Phrased this way,
it would be hard to believe no explosion ever does anything differently.
The explanation of this apparently astonishing coincidence is: We defined the center of mass precisely so this is
exactly what we would get. Recall that first we defined the momentum of the system:
We then concluded that the net external force on the system (if any) changed this momentum:
and then—and here’s the point—we defined an acceleration that would obey Newton’s second law. That is, we
demanded that we should be able to write
which requires that

434 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
where the quantity inside the parentheses is the center of mass of our system. So, it’s not astonishing that the
center of mass obeys Newton’s second law; we defined it so that it would.
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the application of conservation of momentum when the mass changes with time, as well as the
velocity
• Calculate the speed of a rocket in empty space, at some time, given initial conditions
• Calculate the speed of a rocket in Earth’s gravity field, at some time, given initial conditions
Now we deal with the case where the mass of an object is changing. We analyze the motion of a rocket, which
changes its velocity (and hence its momentum) by ejecting burned fuel gases, thus causing it to accelerate in the
opposite direction of the velocity of the ejected fuel (see Figure 9.32). Specifically: A fully fueled rocket ship in deep
space has a total mass (this mass includes the initial mass of the fuel). At some moment in time, the rocket has a
velocity and mass m; this mass is a combination of the mass of the empty rocket and the mass of the remaining
unburned fuel it contains. (We refer to m as the “instantaneous mass” and as the “instantaneous velocity.”) The
rocket accelerates by burning the fuel it carries and ejecting the burned exhaust gases. If the burn rate of the fuel is
constant, and the velocity at which the exhaust is ejected is also constant, what is the change of velocity of the
rocket as a result of burning all of its fuel?
FIGURE 9.32 The space shuttle had a number of reusable parts. Solid fuel boosters on either side were recovered and refueled after each
flight, and the entire orbiter returned to Earth for use in subsequent flights. The large liquid fuel tank was expended. The space shuttle was
a complex assemblage of technologies, employing both solid and liquid fuel, and pioneering ceramic tiles as reentry heat shields. As a
result, it permitted multiple launches as opposed to single-use rockets. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Physical Analysis
Here’s a description of what happens, so that you get a feel for the physics involved.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.7 • Rocket Propulsion 435
• As the rocket engines operate, they are continuously ejecting burned fuel gases, which have both mass and
velocity, and therefore some momentum. By conservation of momentum, the rocket’s momentum changes by
this same amount (with the opposite sign). We will assume the burned fuel is being ejected at a constant rate,
which means the rate of change of the rocket’s momentum is also constant. By Equation 9.9, this represents a
constant force on the rocket.
• However, as time goes on, the mass of the rocket (which includes the mass of the remaining fuel) continuously
decreases. Thus, even though the force on the rocket is constant, the resulting acceleration is not; it is
continuously increasing.
• So, the total change of the rocket’s velocity will depend on the amount of mass of fuel that is burned, and that
dependence is not linear.
The problem has the mass and velocity of the rocket changing; also, the total mass of ejected gases is changing. If
we define our system to be the rocket + fuel, then this is a closed system (since the rocket is in deep space, there
are no external forces acting on this system); as a result, momentum is conserved for this system. Thus, we can
apply conservation of momentum to answer the question (Figure 9.33).
FIGURE 9.33 The rocket accelerates to the right due to the expulsion of some of its fuel mass to the left. Conservation of momentum
enables us to determine the resulting change of velocity. The mass m is the instantaneous total mass of the rocket (i.e., mass of rocket body
plus mass of fuel at that point in time). (credit: modification of work by NASA/Bill Ingalls)
At the same moment that the total instantaneous rocket mass is m (i.e., m is the mass of the rocket body plus the
mass of the fuel at that point in time), we define the rocket’s instantaneous velocity to be (in the
+x-direction); this velocity is measured relative to an inertial reference system (the Earth, for example). Thus, the
initial momentum of the system is
The rocket’s engines are burning fuel at a constant rate and ejecting the exhaust gases in the −x-direction. During an
infinitesimal time interval dt, the engines eject a (positive) infinitesimal mass of gas at velocity ; note
that although the rocket velocity is measured with respect to Earth, the exhaust gas velocity is measured with
respect to the (moving) rocket. Measured with respect to the Earth, therefore, the exhaust gas has velocity .
As a consequence of the ejection of the fuel gas, the rocket’s mass decreases by , and its velocity increases by
. Therefore, including both the change for the rocket and the change for the exhaust gas, the final momentum of
the system is
Since all vectors are in the x-direction, we drop the vector notation. Applying conservation of momentum, we obtain

436 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Now, and dv are each very small; thus, their product is very, very small, much smaller than the other
two terms in this expression. We neglect this term, therefore, and obtain:
Our next step is to remember that, since represents an increase in the mass of ejected gases, it must also
represent a decrease of mass of the rocket:
Replacing this, we have
or
Integrating from the initial mass m0 to the final mass m of the rocket gives us the result we are after:
and thus our final answer is
9.38
This result is called the rocket equation. It was originally derived by the Russian rocket scientist Konstantin
Tsiolkovsky in 1897. It gives us the change of velocity that the rocket obtains from burning a mass of fuel that
decreases the total rocket mass from down to m. As expected, the relationship between and the change of
mass of the rocket is nonlinear.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rocket Propulsion
In rocket problems, the most common questions are finding the change of velocity due to burning some amount of
fuel for some amount of time; or to determine the acceleration that results from burning fuel.
1. To determine the change of velocity, use the rocket equation Equation 9.38.
2. To determine the acceleration, determine the force by using the impulse-momentum theorem, using the
rocket equation to determine the change of velocity.
EXAMPLE 9.20
Thrust on a Spacecraft
A spacecraft is moving in gravity-free space along a straight path when its pilot decides to accelerate forward. He
turns on the thrusters, and burned fuel is ejected at a constant rate of , at a speed (relative to the
rocket) of . The initial mass of the spacecraft and its unburned fuel is , and the
Access for free at openstax.org

9.7 • Rocket Propulsion 437
thrusters are on for 30 s.
a. What is the thrust (the force applied to the rocket by the ejected fuel) on the spacecraft?
b. What is the spacecraft’s acceleration as a function of time?
c. What are the spacecraft’s accelerations at t = 0, 15, 30, and 35 s?
Strategy
a. The force on the spacecraft is equal to the rate of change of the momentum of the fuel.
b. Knowing the force from part (a), we can use Newton’s second law to calculate the consequent acceleration.
The key here is that, although the force applied to the spacecraft is constant (the fuel is being ejected at a
constant rate), the mass of the spacecraft isn’t; thus, the acceleration caused by the force won’t be constant.
We expect to get a function a(t), therefore.
c. We’ll use the function we obtain in part (b), and just substitute the numbers given. Important: We expect that
the acceleration will get larger as time goes on, since the mass being accelerated is continuously decreasing
(fuel is being ejected from the rocket).
Solution
a. The momentum of the ejected fuel gas is
The ejection velocity is constant, and therefore the force is
Now, is the rate of change of the mass of the fuel; the problem states that this is .
Substituting, we get
b. Above, we defined m to be the combined mass of the empty rocket plus however much unburned fuel it
contained: . From Newton’s second law,
The force is constant and the empty rocket mass is constant, but the fuel mass is decreasing at a
uniform rate; specifically:
This gives us
Notice that, as expected, the acceleration is a function of time. Substituting the given numbers:
c. At :
At .