# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 119-126
############################################################

3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 107
Solution
a.
b.
Significance
The velocity of the particle gives us direction information, indicating the particle is moving to the left (west) or right
(east). The speed gives the magnitude of the velocity. By graphing the position, velocity, and speed as functions of
time, we can understand these concepts visually Figure 3.9. In (a), the graph shows the particle moving in the
positive direction until t = 0.5 s, when it reverses direction. The reversal of direction can also be seen in (b) at 0.5 s
where the velocity is zero and then turns negative. At 1.0 s it is back at the origin where it started. The particle’s
velocity at 1.0 s in (b) is negative, because it is traveling in the negative direction. But in (c), however, its speed is
positive and remains positive throughout the travel time. We can also interpret velocity as the slope of the position-
versus-time graph. The slope of x(t) is decreasing toward zero, becoming zero at 0.5 s and increasingly negative
thereafter. This analysis of comparing the graphs of position, velocity, and speed helps catch errors in calculations.
The graphs must be consistent with each other and help interpret the calculations.
FIGURE 3.9 (a) Position: x(t) versus time. (b) Velocity: v(t) versus time. The slope of the position graph is the velocity. A rough comparison
of the slopes of the tangent lines in (a) at 0.25 s, 0.5 s, and 1.0 s with the values for velocity at the corresponding times indicates they are
the same values. (c) Speed: versus time. Speed is always a positive number.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.2
The position of an object as a function of time is . (a) What is the velocity of the object as a
function of time? (b) Is the velocity ever positive? (c) What are the velocity and speed at t = 1.0 s?
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the average acceleration between two points in time.
• Calculate the instantaneous acceleration given the functional form of velocity.
• Explain the vector nature of instantaneous acceleration and velocity.
• Explain the difference between average acceleration and instantaneous acceleration.
• Find instantaneous acceleration at a specified time on a graph of velocity versus time.
The importance of understanding acceleration spans our day-to-day experience, as well as the vast reaches of outer
space and the tiny world of subatomic physics. In everyday conversation, to accelerate means to speed up; applying
the brake pedal causes a vehicle to slow down. We are familiar with the acceleration of our car, for example. The
greater the acceleration, the greater the change in velocity over a given time. Acceleration is widely seen in
experimental physics. In linear particle accelerator experiments, for example, subatomic particles are accelerated
to very high velocities in collision experiments, which tell us information about the structure of the subatomic world

108 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
as well as the origin of the universe. In space, cosmic rays are subatomic particles that have been accelerated to
very high energies in supernovas (exploding massive stars) and active galactic nuclei. It is important to understand
the processes that accelerate cosmic rays because these rays contain highly penetrating radiation that can damage
electronics flown on spacecraft, for example.
Average Acceleration
The formal definition of acceleration is consistent with these notions just described, but is more inclusive.
AVERAGE ACCELERATION
Average acceleration is the rate at which velocity changes:
3.8
where is average acceleration, v is velocity, and t is time. (The bar over the a means average acceleration.)
Because acceleration is velocity in meters per second divided by time in seconds, the SI units for acceleration are
often abbreviated m/s2—that is, meters per second squared or meters per second per second. This literally means
by how many meters per second the velocity changes every second. Recall that velocity is a vector—it has both
magnitude and direction—which means that a change in velocity can be a change in magnitude (or speed), but it can
also be a change in direction. For example, if a runner traveling at 10 km/h due east slows to a stop, reverses
direction, and continues her run at 10 km/h due west, her velocity has changed as a result of the change in direction,
although the magnitude of the velocity is the same in both directions. Thus, acceleration occurs when velocity
changes in magnitude (an increase or decrease in speed) or in direction, or both.
ACCELERATION AS A VECTOR
Acceleration is a vector in the same direction as the change in velocity, . Since velocity is a vector, it can
change in magnitude or in direction, or both. Acceleration is, therefore, a change in speed or direction, or both.
Keep in mind that although acceleration is in the direction of the change in velocity, it is not always in the direction of
motion. When an object slows down, its acceleration is opposite to the direction of its motion. Although this is
commonly referred to as deceleration Figure 3.10, we say the train is accelerating in a direction opposite to its
direction of motion.
FIGURE 3.10 A subway train in Sao Paulo, Brazil, accelerates opposite to the motion as it comes into a station. It is accelerating in a
direction opposite to its direction of motion. (credit: modification of work by Yusuke Kawasaki)
The term deceleration can cause confusion in our analysis because it is not a vector and it does not point to a
specific direction with respect to a coordinate system, so we do not use it. Acceleration is a vector, so we must
choose the appropriate sign for it in our chosen coordinate system. In the case of the train in Figure 3.10,
Access for free at openstax.org

3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 109
acceleration is in the negative direction in the chosen coordinate system, so we say the train is undergoing negative
acceleration.
If an object in motion has a velocity in the positive direction with respect to a chosen origin and it acquires a
constant negative acceleration, the object eventually comes to a rest and reverses direction. If we wait long enough,
the object passes through the origin going in the opposite direction. This is illustrated in Figure 3.11.
FIGURE 3.11 An object in motion with a velocity vector toward the east under negative acceleration comes to a rest and reverses direction.
It passes the origin going in the opposite direction after a long enough time.
EXAMPLE 3.5
Calculating Average Acceleration: A Racehorse Leaves the Gate
A racehorse coming out of the gate accelerates from rest to a velocity of 15.0 m/s due west in 1.80 s. What is its
average acceleration?
FIGURE 3.12 Racehorses accelerating out of the gate. (credit: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Strategy
First we draw a sketch and assign a coordinate system to the problem Figure 3.13. This is a simple problem, but it
always helps to visualize it. Notice that we assign east as positive and west as negative. Thus, in this case, we have
negative velocity.
FIGURE 3.13 Identify the coordinate system, the given information, and what you want to determine.
We can solve this problem by identifying from the given information, and then calculating the average
acceleration directly from the equation .

110 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Solution
First, identify the knowns: (the negative sign indicates direction toward the west), Δt = 1.80
s.
Second, find the change in velocity. Since the horse is going from zero to –15.0 m/s, its change in velocity equals its
final velocity:
Last, substitute the known values ( ) and solve for the unknown :
Significance
The negative sign for acceleration indicates that acceleration is toward the west. An acceleration of 8.33 m/s2 due
west means the horse increases its velocity by 8.33 m/s due west each second; that is, 8.33 meters per second per
second, which we write as 8.33 m/s2. This is truly an average acceleration, because the ride is not smooth. We see
later that an acceleration of this magnitude would require the rider to hang on with a force nearly equal to his
weight.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.3
Protons in a linear accelerator are accelerated from rest to in 10–4 s. What is the average
acceleration of the protons?
Instantaneous Acceleration
Instantaneous acceleration a, or acceleration at a specific instant in time, is obtained using the same process
discussed for instantaneous velocity. That is, we calculate the average acceleration between two points in time
separated by and let approach zero. The result is the derivative of the velocity function v(t), which is
instantaneous acceleration and is expressed mathematically as
3.9
Thus, similar to velocity being the derivative of the position function, instantaneous acceleration is the derivative of
the velocity function. We can show this graphically in the same way as instantaneous velocity. In Figure 3.14,
instantaneous acceleration at time t0 is the slope of the tangent line to the velocity-versus-time graph at time t0. We
see that average acceleration approaches instantaneous acceleration as approaches zero. Also in part
(a) of the figure, we see that velocity has a maximum when its slope is zero. This time corresponds to the zero of the
acceleration function. In part (b), instantaneous acceleration at the minimum velocity is shown, which is also zero,
since the slope of the curve is zero there, too. Thus, for a given velocity function, the zeros of the acceleration
function give either the minimum or the maximum velocity.
Access for free at openstax.org

3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 111
FIGURE 3.14 In a graph of velocity versus time, instantaneous acceleration is the slope of the tangent line. (a) Shown is average
acceleration between times , and . When , the average acceleration
approaches instantaneous acceleration at time t0. In view (a), instantaneous acceleration is shown for the point on the velocity curve at
maximum velocity. At this point, instantaneous acceleration is the slope of the tangent line, which is zero. At any other time, the slope of the
tangent line—and thus instantaneous acceleration—would not be zero. (b) Same as (a) but shown for instantaneous acceleration at
minimum velocity.
To illustrate this concept, let’s look at two examples. First, a simple example is shown using Figure 3.9(b), the
velocity-versus-time graph of Example 3.4, to find acceleration graphically. This graph is depicted in Figure 3.15(a),
which is a straight line. The corresponding graph of acceleration versus time is found from the slope of velocity and
is shown in Figure 3.15(b). In this example, the velocity function is a straight line with a constant slope, thus
acceleration is a constant. In the next example, the velocity function has a more complicated functional dependence
on time.
FIGURE 3.15 (a, b) The velocity-versus-time graph is linear and has a negative constant slope (a) that is equal to acceleration, shown in (b).
If we know the functional form of velocity, v(t), we can calculate instantaneous acceleration a(t) at any time point in
the motion using Equation 3.9.
EXAMPLE 3.6
Calculating Instantaneous Acceleration
A particle is in motion and is accelerating. The functional form of the velocity is .
a. Find the functional form of the acceleration.

112 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
b. Find the instantaneous velocity at t = 1, 2, 3, and 5 s.
c. Find the instantaneous acceleration at t = 1, 2, 3, and 5 s.
d. Interpret the results of (c) in terms of the directions of the acceleration and velocity vectors.
Strategy
We find the functional form of acceleration by taking the derivative of the velocity function. Then, we calculate the
values of instantaneous velocity and acceleration from the given functions for each. For part (d), we need to
compare the directions of velocity and acceleration at each time.
Solution
a.
b. , , ,
c. , , ,
d. At t = 1 s, velocity is positive and acceleration is positive, so both velocity and acceleration are
in the same direction. The particle is moving faster.
At t = 2 s, velocity has increased to , where it is maximum, which corresponds to the time when the
acceleration is zero. We see that the maximum velocity occurs when the slope of the velocity function is zero, which
is just the zero of the acceleration function.
At t = 3 s, velocity is and acceleration is negative. The particle has reduced its velocity and the
acceleration vector is negative. The particle is slowing down.
At t = 5 s, velocity is and acceleration is increasingly negative. Between the times t = 3 s and t = 5
s the particle has decreased its velocity to zero and then become negative, thus reversing its direction. The particle
is now speeding up again, but in the opposite direction.
We can see these results graphically in Figure 3.16.
Access for free at openstax.org

3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 113
FIGURE 3.16 (a) Velocity versus time. Tangent lines are indicated at times 1, 2, and 3 s. The slopes of the tangent lines are the
accelerations. At t = 3 s, velocity is positive. At t = 5 s, velocity is negative, indicating the particle has reversed direction. (b) Acceleration
versus time. Comparing the values of accelerations given by the black dots with the corresponding slopes of the tangent lines (slopes of
lines through black dots) in (a), we see they are identical.
Significance
By doing both a numerical and graphical analysis of velocity and acceleration of the particle, we can learn much
about its motion. The numerical analysis complements the graphical analysis in giving a total view of the motion.
The zero of the acceleration function corresponds to the maximum of the velocity in this example. Also in this
example, when acceleration is positive and in the same direction as velocity, velocity increases. As acceleration
tends toward zero, eventually becoming negative, the velocity reaches a maximum, after which it starts decreasing.
If we wait long enough, velocity also becomes negative, indicating a reversal of direction. A real-world example of
this type of motion is a car with a velocity that is increasing to a maximum, after which it starts slowing down, comes
to a stop, then reverses direction.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.4
An airplane lands on a runway traveling east. Describe its acceleration.