# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 188-195
############################################################

178 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
efficiency of the Carnot engine. 82. ACarnotcycleworkingbetween 100°C and 30°C
isusedtodrivearefrigeratorbetween −10°C and 30°C.
81. A Carnot engine working between two heat baths of How much energy must the Carnot engine produce per
temperatures 600 K and 273 K completes each cycle in 5 second so that the refrigerator is able to discard 10 J of
sec. In each cycle, the engine absorbs 10 kJ of heat. Find energy per second?
the power of the engine.
CHALLENGE PROBLEMS
83. (a)Aninfinitesimalamountofheatisaddedreversibly i. Isobaric intake stroke (OA). A mixture of
toasystem.Bycombiningthefirstandsecondlaws,show gasoline and air is drawn into the combustion
that dU =TdS−dW.(b)Whenheatisaddedtoanideal chamberatatmosphericpressure p asthepiston
0
gas, its temperature and volume change from expands, increasing the volume of the cylinder
T 1 andV 1 toT 2 andV 2 .Showthattheentropychangeof from zero to V A .
nmoles of the gas is given by ii. Adiabatic compression stroke (AB). The
T V temperature of the mixture rises as the piston
ΔS=nC v ln T 2+nRln V 2. compresses it adiabatically from a volume
1 1
V toV .
A B
iii. Ignitionatconstantvolume(BC).Themixture
84. Using the result of the preceding problem, show that
is ignited by a spark. The combustion happens so
foranidealgasundergoinganadiabaticprocess, TV γ−1 fastthatthereisessentiallynomotionofthepiston.
is constant. Duringthisprocess,theaddedheat Q causesthe
1
pressuretoincreasefrom p
B
top
C
attheconstant
85. With the help of the two preceding problems, show
volume V (=V ).
that ΔS betweenstates1and2ofnmolesanidealgasis B C
given by iv. Adiabaticexpansion(CD).Theheatedmixture
of gasoline and air expands against the piston,
T p
ΔS=nC p ln T 2−nRlnp 2. increasing the volume from V C toV D . This is
1 1
calledthepowerstroke,asitisthepartofthecycle
that delivers most of the power to the crankshaft.
86. A cylinder contains 500 g of helium at 120 atm and v. Constant-volume exhaust (DA). When the
20°C. The valve is leaky, and all the gas slowly escapes exhaust valve opens, some of the combustion
isothermally into the atmosphere. Use the results of the products escape. There is almost no movement of
preceding problem to determine the resulting change in the piston during this part of the cycle, so the
entropy of the universe. volume remains constant at V A(=V D). Most of
theavailableenergyislosthere,asrepresentedby
87. A diatomic ideal gas is brought from an initial the heat exhaust Q .
2
equilibriumstateat p =0.50atm and T =300K toa
1 1 vi. Isobariccompression(AO).Theexhaustvalve
finalstagewith p =0.20atm and T =500K. Usethe remains open, and the compression from V to
2 1 A
results of the previous problem to determine the entropy zerodrivesouttheremainingcombustionproducts.
change per mole of the gas.
(a) Using (i) e=W/Q ; (ii) W =Q −Q ; and (iii)
1 1 2
88. The gasoline internal combustion engine operates in
Q
1
=nC v(T C−T B), Q
2
=nC v(T D−T A), show that
acycleconsistingofsixparts.Fourofthesepartsinvolve,
among other things, friction, heat exchange through finite e=1−
T D−T
A.
temperature differences, and accelerations of the piston; it
T C−T
B
is irreversible. Nevertheless, it is represented by the ideal
(b)Usethefactthatsteps(ii)and(iv)areadiabatictoshow
reversible Otto cycle, which is illustrated below. The
that
workingsubstanceofthecycleisassumedtobeair.Thesix
steps of theOtto cycleare as follows: e=1− 1 ,
γ−1
r
where r =V A/V
B
. The quantity r is called the
compression ratioof the engine.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 179
(c) In practice, r is kept less than around 7. For larger of about 30%to35% compared with 25%to30% for
values, the gasoline-air mixture is compressed to gasoline engines.
temperatures so high that it explodes before the finely
timed spark is delivered. This preignition causes engine
knockandlossofpower.Showthatfor r =6 and γ =1.4
(the value for air), e=0.51, or an efficiency of 51%.
Because of the many irreversible processes, an actual
internal combustion engine has an efficiency much less
thanthisidealvalue.Atypicalefficiencyforatunedengine
is about 25%to30%.
90. Consider an ideal gas Joule cycle, also called the
Brayton cycle, shown below. Find the formula for
efficiency of the engine using this cycle in terms of P ,
1
P , and γ.
2
89. An ideal diesel cycle is shown below. This cycle
consistsoffivestrokes.Inthiscase,onlyairisdrawninto
the chamber during the intake stroke OA. The air is then
compressedadiabaticallyfromstateAtostateB,raisingits
temperaturehighenoughsothatwhenfuelisaddedduring
the power stroke BC, it ignites. After ignition ends at C,
thereisafurtheradiabaticpowerstrokeCD.Finally,there
isanexhaustatconstantvolumeasthepressuredropsfrom
p to p ,followedbyafurtherexhaustwhenthepiston 91. Derive a formula for the coefficient of performance
D A
ofarefrigeratorusinganidealgasasaworkingsubstance
compresses the chamber volume to zero.
operating in the cycle shown below in terms of the
(a) Use W =Q
1
−Q
2
, Q
1
=nC p(T C−T B), and properties of the three states labeled 1, 2, and 3.
Q
2
=nC v(T D−T A) to show that
e= W =1− T D−T A .
Q
1
γ(T C−T B)
(b)Usethefactthat A→B and C→D areadiabaticto
show that
γ γ
⎛VC⎞ ⎛VB⎞
−
e=1− 1
γ
⎝
⎛
V
V
D
C
⎠
⎞
⎝
⎛
V
VB
A ⎠
⎞
.
−
⎝VD ⎠ ⎝VA ⎠
(c) Since there is no preignition (remember, the chamber
does not contain any fuel during the compression), the
92. Two moles of nitrogen gas, with γ =7/5 for ideal
compression ratio can be larger than that for a gasoline
engine.Typically, V A/V B=15andV D/V C=5.Forthese diatomic gases, occupies a volume of 10−2m 3 in an
insulated cylinder at temperature 300 K. The gas is
valuesand γ =1.4, showthat ε=0.56,oranefficiency
adiabatically and reversibly compressed to a volume of 5
of 56%. Diesel engines actually operate at an efficiency
L. The piston of the cylinder is locked in its place, and

180 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
the insulation around the cylinder is removed. The heat- gas,(c)thechangeintheinternalenergyofthegas,and(d)
conducting cylinder is then placed in a 300-K bath. Heat the change in entropy of the gas.
from the compressed gas leaves the gas, and the
temperature of the gas becomes 300 K again. The gas is 93. A Carnot refrigerator, working between 0°C and
thenslowlyexpandedatthefixedtemperature300Kuntil
30°C is used to cool a bucket of water containing
the volume of the gas becomes 10−2m 3, thus making a
10−2 m 3 ofwaterat 30°C to 5°C in2hours.Findthe
complete cycle for the gas. For the entire cycle, calculate
total amount of work needed.
(a)theworkdonebythegas,(b)theheatintooroutofthe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 181
5 | ELECTRIC CHARGES
AND FIELDS
Figure 5.1 Electric charges exist all around us. They can cause objects to be repelled from each other or to be attracted to each
other. (credit: modification of work by Sean McGrath)
Chapter Outline
5.1Electric Charge
5.2Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
5.3Coulomb's Law
5.4Electric Field
5.5Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
5.6Electric Field Lines
5.7Electric Dipoles
Introduction
BackwhenwewerestudyingNewton’slaws,weidentifiedseveralphysicalphenomenaasforces.Wedidsobasedonthe
effecttheyhadonaphysicalobject:Specifically,theycausedtheobjecttoaccelerate.Later,whenwestudiedimpulseand
momentum,weexpandedthisideatoidentifyaforceasanyphysicalphenomenonthatchangedthemomentumofanobject.
In either case, the result is the same: We recognize a force by the effect that it has on an object.
InGravitation(http://cnx.org/content/m58344/latest/),weexaminedtheforceofgravity,whichactsonallobjects
withmass.Inthischapter,webeginthestudyoftheelectricforce,whichactsonallobjectswithapropertycalledcharge.
Theelectricforceismuchstrongerthangravity(inmostsystemswherebothappear),butitcanbeaforceofattractionora
forceofrepulsion,whichleadstoverydifferenteffectsonobjects.Theelectricforcehelpskeepatomstogether,soitisof

182 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
fundamentalimportanceinmatter.Butitalsogovernsmosteverydayinteractionswedealwith,fromchemicalinteractions
to biological processes.
5.1 | Electric Charge
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the concept of electric charge
• Explain qualitatively the force electric charge creates
Youarecertainlyfamiliarwithelectronicdevicesthatyouactivatewiththeclickofaswitch,fromcomputerstocellphones
totelevision.Andyouhavecertainlyseenelectricityinaflashoflightningduringaheavythunderstorm.Butyouhavealso
mostlikelyexperiencedelectricaleffectsinotherways,maybewithoutrealizingthatanelectricforcewasinvolved.Let’s
take a look at some of these activities and see what we can learn from them about electric charges and forces.
Discoveries
Youhaveprobablyexperiencedthephenomenonofstaticelectricity:Whenyoufirsttakeclothesoutofadryer,many(not
all)ofthemtendtosticktogether;forsomefabrics,theycanbeverydifficulttoseparate.Anotherexampleoccursifyou
takeawoolensweateroffquickly—youcanfeel(andhear)thestaticelectricitypullingonyourclothes,andperhapseven
yourhair.Ifyoucombyourhaironadrydayandthenputthecombclosetoathinstreamofwatercomingoutofafaucet,
you will find that the water stream bends toward (is attracted to) the comb (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.2 An electrically charged comb attracts a stream of
water from a distance. Note that the water is not touching the
comb. (credit: Jane Whitney)
Supposeyoubringthecombclosetosomesmallstripsofpaper;thestripsofpaperareattractedtothecombandevencling
toit(Figure 5.3).Inthekitchen,quicklypullalengthofplasticclingwrapofftheroll;itwilltendtoclingtomostany
nonmetallicmaterial(suchasplastic,glass,orfood).Ifyourubaballoononawallforafewseconds,itwillsticktothe
wall.Probablythemostannoyingeffectofstaticelectricityisgettingshockedbyadoorknob(orafriend)aftershuffling
your feet on some types of carpeting.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 183
Figure 5.3 After being used to comb hair, this comb attracts
small strips of paper from a distance, without physical contact.
Investigation of this behavior helped lead to the concept of the
electric force. (credit: Jane Whitney)
Manyofthesephenomenahavebeenknownforcenturies.TheancientGreekphilosopherThalesofMiletus(624–546BCE)
recordedthatwhenamber(ahard,translucent,fossilizedresinfromextincttrees)wasvigorouslyrubbedwithapieceoffur,
aforcewascreatedthatcausedthefurandtheambertobeattractedtoeachother(Figure5.4).Additionally,hefoundthat
therubbedamberwouldnotonlyattractthefur,andthefurattracttheamber,buttheybothcouldaffectother(nonmetallic)
objects, even if not in contact with those objects (Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.4 Borneo amber is mined in Sabah, Malaysia, from shale-sandstone-mudstone veins.
When a piece of amber is rubbed with a piece of fur, the amber gains more electrons, giving it a
net negative charge. At the same time, the fur, having lost electrons, becomes positively charged.
(credit: “Sebakoamber”/Wikimedia Commons)

184 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
Figure 5.5 When materials are rubbed together, charges can be separated, particularly if one material has a greater affinity for
electrons than another. (a) Both the amber and cloth are originally neutral, with equal positive and negative charges. Only a tiny
fraction of the charges are involved, and only a few of them are shown here. (b) When rubbed together, some negative charge is
transferred to the amber, leaving the cloth with a net positive charge. (c) When separated, the amber and cloth now have net
charges, but the absolute value of the net positive and negative charges will be equal.
TheEnglishphysicistWilliamGilbert(1544–1603)alsostudiedthisattractiveforce,usingvarioussubstances.Heworked
withamber,and,inaddition,heexperimentedwithrockcrystalandvariouspreciousandsemi-preciousgemstones.Healso
experimentedwithseveralmetals.Hefoundthatthemetalsneverexhibitedthisforce,whereasthemineralsdid.Moreover,
althoughanelectrifiedamberrodwouldattractapieceoffur,itwouldrepelanotherelectrifiedamberrod;similarly,two
electrified pieces of fur would repel each other.
Thissuggestedthereweretwotypesofanelectricproperty;thispropertyeventuallycametobecalledelectriccharge.The
differencebetweenthetwotypesofelectricchargeisinthedirectionsoftheelectricforcesthateachtypeofchargecauses:
Theseforcesarerepulsivewhenthesametypeofchargeexistsontwointeractingobjectsandattractivewhenthecharges
are of opposite types. The SI unit of electric charge is the coulomb (C), after the French physicist Charles-Augustin de
Coulomb(1736–1806).
Themostpeculiaraspectofthisnewforceisthatitdoesnotrequirephysicalcontactbetweenthetwoobjectsinorderto
causeanacceleration.Thisisanexampleofaso-called“long-range”force.(Or,asAlbertEinsteinlaterphrasedit,“action
atadistance.”)Withtheexceptionofgravity,allotherforceswehavediscussedsofaractonlywhenthetwointeracting
objects actually touch.
TheAmericanphysicistandstatesmanBenjaminFranklinfoundthathecouldconcentratechargeina“Leydenjar,”which
wasessentiallyaglassjarwithtwosheetsofmetalfoil,oneinsideandoneoutside,withtheglassbetweenthem(Figure
5.6). This created a large electric force between the two foil sheets.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9