# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 14-18
############################################################

2 Preface
organization and pedagogical features were developed Formation
and vetted with feedback from science educators Chapter 3: Interference
dedicated to the project. Chapter 4: Diffraction
VOLUME I Unit 2: Modern Physics
Unit 1: Mechanics Chapter 5: Relativity
Chapter 6: Photons and Matter Waves
Chapter 1: Units and Measurement
Chapter 7: Quantum Mechanics
Chapter 2: Vectors
Chapter 8: Atomic Structure
Chapter 3: Motion Along a Straight Line
Chapter 9: Condensed Matter Physics
Chapter 4: Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
Chapter 10: Nuclear Physics
Chapter 5: Newton’s Laws of Motion
Chapter 11: Particle Physics and Cosmology
Chapter 6: Applications of Newton’s Laws
Chapter 7: Work and Kinetic Energy Pedagogical foundation
Chapter 8: Potential Energy and Conservation of Throughout University Physics you will find derivations
Energy of concepts that present classical ideas and
Chapter 9: Linear Momentum and Collisions techniques, as well as modern applications and
Chapter 10: Fixed-Axis Rotation methods. Most chapters start with observations or
Chapter 11: Angular Momentum experiments that place the material in a context of
Chapter 12: Static Equilibrium and Elasticity physical experience. Presentations and explanations
Chapter 13: Gravitation rely on years of classroom experience on the part of
Chapter 14: Fluid Mechanics long-time physics professors, striving for a balance of
clarity and rigor that has proven successful with their
Unit 2: Waves and Acoustics
students. Throughout the text, links enable students to
Chapter 15: Oscillations review earlier material and then return to the present
Chapter 16: Waves discussion, reinforcing connections between topics.
Chapter 17: Sound Key historical figures and experiments are discussed in
the main text (rather than in boxes or sidebars),
VOLUME II
maintaining a focus on the development of physical
Unit 1: Thermodynamics intuition. Key ideas, definitions, and equations are
highlighted in the text and listed in summary form at
Chapter 1: Temperature and Heat
the end of each chapter. Examples and chapter-
Chapter 2: The Kinetic Theory of Gases
opening images often include contemporary
Chapter 3: The First Law of Thermodynamics
applications from daily life or modern science and
Chapter 4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
engineering that students can relate to, from smart
Unit 2: Electricity and Magnetism phones to the internet to GPS devices.
Chapter 5: Electric Charges and Fields Assessments that reinforce key concepts
Chapter 6: Gauss’s Law In-chapter Examples generally follow a three-part
Chapter 7: Electric Potential format of Strategy, Solution, and Significance to
Chapter 8: Capacitance emphasize how to approach a problem, how to work
Chapter 9: Current and Resistance with the equations, and how to check and generalize
Chapter 10: Direct-Current Circuits the result. Examples are often followed by questions
Chapter 11: Magnetic Forces and Fields and answers to help reinforce for students the
Chapter 12: Sources of Magnetic Fields important ideas of the examples. Problem-Solving
Chapter 13: Electromagnetic Induction Strategies in each chapter break down methods of
Chapter 14: Inductance approaching various types of problems into steps
Chapter 15: Alternating-Current Circuits students can follow for guidance. The book also
Chapter 16: Electromagnetic Waves includes exercises at the end of each chapter so
students can practice what they’ve learned.
VOLUME III
Conceptual questions do not require calculation
Unit 1: Optics
but test student learning of the key concepts.
Chapter 1: The Nature of Light Problems categorized by section test student
Chapter 2: Geometric Optics and Image problem-solving skills and the ability to apply
Access for free at openstax.org

Preface 3
ideas to practical situations. with other faculty.
Additional Problems apply knowledge across
To reach the Community Hubs, visit
the chapter, forcing students to identify what
www.oercommons.org/hubs/OpenStax.
concepts and equations are appropriate for
solving given problems. Randomly located Partner resources
throughout the problems are Unreasonable OpenStax partners are our allies in the mission to make
Results exercises that ask students to evaluate high-quality learning materials affordable and
the answer to a problem and explain why it is not accessible to students and instructors everywhere.
reasonable and what assumptions made might Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax
not be correct. titles at a low cost. To access the partner resources for
Challenge Problems extend text ideas to your text, visit your book page on OpenStax.org.
interesting but difficult situations.
About the authors
Answers for selected exercises are available in an
Senior contributing authors
Answer Key at the end of the book.
Samuel J. Ling, Truman State University
Answers to Questions in the Book Dr. Samuel Ling has taught introductory and advanced
Answers to Unreasonable Results are not provided. All physics for over 25 years at Truman State University,
answers to Check Your Understanding are provided in where he is currently Professor of Physics and the
the Answer Key in the book. Odd-numbered answers to Department Chair. Dr. Ling has two PhDs from Boston
Conceptual Questions, Problems, Additional Problems, University, one in Chemistry and the other in Physics,
and Challenge Problems are also provided in the and he was a Research Fellow at the Indian Institute of
Answer Key. Students can find additional answer Science, Bangalore, before joining Truman. Dr. Ling is
information in the Student Solution Guide via the also an author of A First Course in Vibrations and
Student Resources page. Answers to even-numbered Waves, published by Oxford University Press. Dr. Ling
Conceptual Questions, Problems, Additional Problems, has considerable experience with research in Physics
and Challenge Problems are provided only to Education and has published research on collaborative
instructors in the Instructor Answer Guide via the learning methods in physics teaching. He was awarded
Instructor Resources page. a Truman Fellow and a Jepson fellow in recognition of
his innovative teaching methods. Dr. Ling’s research
Additional resources
publications have spanned Cosmology, Solid State
Student and instructor resources Physics, and Nonlinear Optics.
We’ve compiled additional resources for both students
Jeff Sanny, Loyola Marymount University
and instructors, including Getting Started Guides,
Dr. Jeff Sanny earned a BS in Physics from Harvey
PowerPoint slides, and answer and solution guides for
Mudd College in 1974 and a PhD in Solid State Physics
instructors and students. Instructor resources require
from the University of California–Los Angeles in 1980.
a verified instructor account, which you can apply for
He joined the faculty at Loyola Marymount University in
when you log in or create your account on
the fall of 1980. During his tenure, he has served as
OpenStax.org. Take advantage of these resources to
department Chair as well as Associate Dean. Dr. Sanny
supplement your OpenStax book.
enjoys teaching introductory physics in particular. He is
Community Hubs also passionate about providing students with research
OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of experience and has directed an active undergraduate
Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer student research group in space physics for many
Community Hubs on OER Commons – a platform for years.
instructors to share community-created resources that
William Moebs, Formerly of Loyola Marymount
support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our
University
Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
Dr. William Moebs earned a BS and PhD (1959 and
materials or download resources to use in their own
1965) from the University of Michigan. He then joined
courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
their staff as a Research Associate for one year, where
material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We
he continued his doctoral research in particle physics.
encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects
In 1966, he accepted an appointment to the Physics
most relevant to your teaching and research as an
Department of Indiana Purdue Fort Wayne (IPFW),
opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage
where he served as Department Chair from 1971 to

4 Preface
1979. In 1979, he moved to Loyola Marymount Kenneth DeNisco, Harrisburg Area Community College
University (LMU), where he served as Chair of the Robert Edmonds, Tarrant County College
Physics Department from 1979 to 1986. He retired William Falls, Erie Community College
from LMU in 2000. He has published research in Stanley Forrester, Broward College
particle physics, chemical kinetics, cell division, atomic Umesh Garg, University of Notre Dame
physics, and physics teaching. Maurizio Giannotti, Barry University
Bryan Gibbs, Dallas County Community College
Contributing authors
Lynn Gillette, Pima Community College–West Campus
Stephen D. Druger, Northwestern University
Mark Giroux, East Tennessee State University
Alice Kolakowska, University of Memphis
Matthew Griffiths, University of New Haven
David Anderson, Albion College
Alfonso Hinojosa, University of Texas–Arlington
Daniel Bowman, Ferrum College
Steuard Jensen, Alma College
Dedra Demaree, Georgetown University
David Kagan, University of Massachusetts
Edw. S. Ginsberg, University of Massachusetts
Sergei Katsev, University of Minnesota–Duluth
Joseph Trout, Richard Stockton College
Gregory Lapicki, East Carolina University
Kevin Wheelock, Bellevue College
Jill Leggett, Florida State College–Jacksonville
David Smith, University of the Virgin Islands
Alfredo Louro, University of Calgary
Takashi Sato, Kwantlen Polytechnic University
James Maclaren, Tulane University
Gerald Friedman, Santa Fe Community College
Ponn Maheswaranathan, Winthrop University
Lev Gasparov, University of North Florida
Seth Major, Hamilton College
Lee LaRue, Paris Junior College
Oleg Maksimov, Excelsior College
Mark Lattery, University of Wisconsin
Aristides Marcano, Delaware State University
Richard Ludlow, Daniel Webster College
James McDonald, University of Hartford
Patrick Motl, Indiana University Kokomo
Ralph McGrew, SUNY–Broome Community College
Tao Pang, University of Nevada, Las Vegas
Paul Miller, West Virginia University
Kenneth Podolak, Plattsburgh State University
Tamar More, University of Portland
Reviewers Farzaneh Najmabadi, University of Phoenix
Salameh Ahmad, Rochester Institute of Richard Olenick, The University of Dallas
Technology–Dubai Christopher Porter, Ohio State University
John Aiken, University of Colorado–Boulder Liza Pujji, Manakau Institute of Technology
Raymond Benge, Terrant County College Baishali Ray, Young Harris University
Gavin Buxton, Robert Morris University Andrew Robinson, Carleton University
Erik Christensen, South Florida State College Aruvana Roy, Young Harris University
Clifton Clark, Fort Hays State University Gajendra Tulsian, Daytona State College
Nelson Coates, California Maritime Academy Adria Updike, Roger Williams University
Herve Collin, Kapi’olani Community College Clark Vangilder, Central Arizona University
Carl Covatto, Arizona State University Steven Wolf, Texas State University
Alejandro Cozzani, Imperial Valley College Alexander Wurm, Western New England University
Danielle Dalafave, The College of New Jersey Lei Zhang, Winston Salem State University
Nicholas Darnton, Georgia Institute of Technology Ulrich Zurcher, Cleveland State University
Ethan Deneault, University of Tampa
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 1
Units and Measurement
FIGURE 1.1 This image might be showing any number of things. It might be a whirlpool in a tank of water or perhaps a collage of paint
and shiny beads done for art class. Without knowing the size of the object in units we all recognize, such as meters or inches, it is difficult
to know what we’re looking at. In fact, this image shows the Whirlpool Galaxy (and its companion galaxy), which is about 60,000 light-
years in diameter (about across). (credit: modification of work by S. Beckwith (STScI) Hubble Heritage Team, (STScI/AURA),
ESA, NASA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
1.2 Units and Standards
1.3 Unit Conversion
1.4 Dimensional Analysis
1.5 Estimates and Fermi Calculations
1.6 Significant Figures
1.7 Solving Problems in Physics
INTRODUCTION As noted in the figure caption, the chapter-opening image is of the Whirlpool Galaxy, which we
examine in the first section of this chapter. Galaxies are as immense as atoms are small, yet the same laws of
physics describe both, along with all the rest of nature—an indication of the underlying unity in the universe. The
laws of physics are surprisingly few, implying an underlying simplicity to nature’s apparent complexity. In this text,
you learn about the laws of physics. Galaxies and atoms may seem far removed from your daily life, but as you begin
to explore this broad-ranging subject, you may soon come to realize that physics plays a much larger role in your life
than you first thought, no matter your life goals or career choice.