# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 382-386
############################################################

370 8 • Chapter Review
person on a dock above the water level have a local minimum (not at ∞ (b) What
holds out a net to catch the pebble. (a) How
is the force on an atom at this separation? (c)
much work is done on the pebble by gravity
How does the force vary with the separation
during the drop? (b) What is the change in the
distance?
gravitational potential energy during the drop? If
the gravitational potential energy is zero at the 28 . A particle of mass moves under the
water line, what is the gravitational potential influence of the force If its
energy (c) when the pebble is dropped? (d) speed at is what is its
When it reaches the net? What if the speed at
gravitational potential energy was Joules at
29 . A particle of mass moves under the
water level? (e) Find the answers to the same
influence of the force
questions in (c) and (d).
If its speed at is what
23 . A cat’s crinkle ball toy of mass is thrown
is its speed at
straight up with an initial speed of .
Assume in this problem that air drag is 30 . A crate on rollers is being pushed without frictional
negligible. (a) What is the kinetic energy of the loss of energy across the floor of a freight car (see
ball as it leaves the hand? (b) How much work is the following figure). The car is moving to the right
done by the gravitational force during the ball’s with a constant speed If the crate starts at rest
rise to its peak? (c) What is the change in the relative to the freight car, then from the work-energy
gravitational potential energy of the ball during theorem, where d, the distance the
the rise to its peak? (d) If the gravitational crate moves, and v, the speed of the crate, are both
potential energy is taken to be zero at the point measured relative to the freight car. (a) To an
where it leaves your hand, what is the observer at rest beside the tracks, what distance
gravitational potential energy when it reaches is the crate pushed when it moves the distance d in
the maximum height? (e) What if the the car? (b) What are the crate’s initial and final
gravitational potential energy is taken to be zero speeds and as measured by the observer
at the maximum height the ball reaches, what beside the tracks? (c) Show that
would the gravitational potential energy be when and, consequently,
it leaves the hand? (f) What is the maximum that work is equal to the change in kinetic energy in
height the ball reaches? both reference systems.
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
24 . A force acts on a particle as it
moves along the positive x-axis. (a) How much
work does the force do on the particle as it
moves from to (b) Why is
it not possible to choose ∞ or as the
8.3 Conservation of Energy
reference point for the potential energy
associated with this force? 31 . A boy throws a ball of mass straight
upward with an initial speed of When the
25 . A force acts on a
ball returns to the boy, its speed is How
particle. How much work does the force do on much much work does air resistance do on the
the particle as it moves from to ball during its flight?
32 . A mouse of mass 200 g falls 100 m down a
26 . Find the force corresponding to the potential vertical mine shaft and lands at the bottom with
energy a speed of 8.0 m/s. During its fall, how much
work is done on the mouse by air resistance?
27 . The potential energy function for either one of
the two atoms in a diatomic molecule is often 33 . Using energy considerations and assuming
approximated by where x negligible air resistance, show that a rock
is the distance between the atoms. (a) At what thrown from a bridge 20.0 m above water with
distance of separation does the potential energy an initial speed of 15.0 m/s strikes the water
Access for free at openstax.org

8 • Chapter Review 371
with a speed of 24.8 m/s independent of the 40 . A girl on a skateboard (total mass of 40 kg) is
direction thrown. (Hint: show that moving at a speed of 10 m/s at the bottom of a
long ramp. The ramp is inclined at with
respect to the horizontal. If she travels 14.2 m
34 . A 1.0-kg ball at the end of a 2.0-m string swings
upward along the ramp before stopping, what is
in a vertical plane. At its lowest point the ball is
the net frictional force on her?
moving with a speed of 10 m/s. (a) What is its
speed at the top of its path? (b) What is the 41 . A baseball of mass 0.25 kg is hit at home plate
tension in the string when the ball is at the with a speed of 40 m/s. When it lands in a seat in
bottom and at the top of its path? the left-field bleachers a horizontal distance 120
m from home plate, it is moving at 30 m/s. If the
35 . Ignoring details associated with friction, extra
ball lands 20 m above the spot where it was hit,
forces exerted by arm and leg muscles, and
how much work is done on it by air resistance?
other factors, we can consider a pole vault as
the conversion of an athlete’s running kinetic 42 . A small block of mass m slides without friction
energy to gravitational potential energy. If an around the loop-the-loop apparatus shown
athlete is to lift their body 4.8 m during a vault, below. (a) If the block starts from rest at A, what
what speed must they have when they plant the is its speed at B? (b) What is the force of the
pole? track on the block at B?
36 . Tarzan grabs a vine hanging vertically from a tall
tree when he is running at (a) How high
can he swing upward? (b) Does the length of the
vine affect this height?
37 . Assume that the force of a bow on an arrow
behaves like the spring force. In aiming the
arrow, an archer pulls the bow back 50 cm and
holds it in position with a force of . If the
mass of the arrow is and the “spring” is
43 . The massless spring of a spring gun has a force
massless, what is the speed of the arrow
constant When the gun is aimed
immediately after it leaves the bow?
vertically, a 15-g projectile is shot to a height of
38 . A man is skiing across level ground at a 0.50 m above the end of the expanded spring.
speed of when he comes to the small slope (See below.) How much was the spring
1.8 m higher than ground level shown in the compressed initially?
following figure. (a) If the skier coasts up the hill,
what is his speed when he reaches the top plateau?
Assume friction between the snow and skis is
negligible. (b) What is his speed when he reaches
the upper level if an frictional force acts on
the skis?
39 . A sled of mass 70 kg starts from rest and slides
down a incline long. It then travels for
44 . A small ball is tied to a string and set rotating
20 m horizontally before starting back up an
with negligible friction in a vertical circle. If the
incline. It travels 80 m along this incline before
ball moves over the top of the circle at its
coming to rest. What is the magnitude of the net
slowest possible speed (so that the tension in
work done on the sled by friction?
the string is negligible), what is the tension in
the string at the bottom of the circle, assuming

372 8 • Chapter Review
there is no additional energy added to the ball mechanical energy E of the particle is −6.0 J, what
during rotation? are the minimum and maximum positions of the
particle? (c) What are these positions if
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
(d) If , what are the speeds of the particle
45 . A mysterious constant force of 10 N acts at the positions listed in part (a)?
horizontally on everything. The direction of the
force is found to be always pointed toward a wall
in a big hall. Find the potential energy of a
particle due to this force when it is at a distance
x from the wall, assuming the potential energy at
the wall to be zero.
46 . A single force (in newtons) acts
on a 1.0-kg body. When the speed of
the body is 4.0 m/s. What is its speed at
47 . A particle of mass 4.0 kg is constrained to move 51 . (a) Sketch a graph of the potential energy
along the x-axis under a single force
function where
where The
are constants. (b) What is the force
particle’s speed at A, where is 6.0
corresponding to this potential energy? (c)
m/s. What is its speed at B, where
Suppose a particle of mass m moving with this
potential energy has a velocity when its
48 . The force on a particle of mass 2.0 kg varies with position is . Show that the particle does
position according to (x in not pass through the origin unless
meters, F(x) in newtons). The particle’s velocity
at is 5.0 m/s. Calculate the
mechanical energy of the particle using (a) the
origin as the reference point and (b)
as the reference point. (c) Find the particle’s 8.5 Sources of Energy
velocity at Do this part of the
52 . In the cartoon movie Pocahontas
problem for each reference point.
(https://openstax.org/l/21pocahontclip),
49 . A 4.0-kg particle moving along the x-axis is acted Pocahontas runs to the edge of a cliff and jumps
upon by the force whose functional form appears off, showcasing the fun side of her personality.
below. The velocity of the particle at is (a) If she is running at 3.0 m/s before jumping
Find the particle’s speed at off the cliff and she hits the water at the bottom
Does the of the cliff at 20.0 m/s, how high is the cliff?
particle turn around at some point and head back Assume negligible air drag in this cartoon. (b) If
toward the origin? (e) Repeat part (d) if she jumped off the same cliff from a standstill,
how fast would she be falling right before she hit
the water?
53 . In the reality television show “Amazing Race”
(https://openstax.org/l/21amazraceclip), a
contestant is firing 3.0-kg watermelons from a
slingshot to hit targets down the field. The
slingshot is pulled back 2.0 m and the
watermelon is considered to be at ground level.
The launch point is 0.75 m from the ground and
50 . A particle of mass 0.50 kg moves along the x-axis the targets are 10 m horizontally away. Calculate
with a potential energy whose dependence on x is the spring constant of the slingshot.
shown below. (a) What is the force on the particle at
54 . In the Back to the Future movies
12 m? (b) If the total
(https://openstax.org/l/21bactofutclip), a
Access for free at openstax.org

8 • Chapter Review 373
DeLorean car of mass 1230 kg travels at 88 energy of the cow before the catapult is
miles per hour to venture back to the future. (a) released? (c) What is the speed of the cow right
What is the kinetic energy of the DeLorean? (b) before it lands on the ground?
What spring constant would be needed to stop
60 . A 60.0-kg skier with an initial speed of 12.0 m/s
this DeLorean in a distance of 0.1m?
coasts up a 2.50-m high rise as shown. Find her final
55 . In the Hunger Games movie speed at the top, given that the coefficient of friction
(https://openstax.org/l/21HungGamesclip), between her skis and the snow is 0.80.
Katniss Everdeen fires a 0.0200-kg arrow from
ground level to pierce an apple up on a stage.
The spring constant of the bow is 330 N/m and
she pulls the arrow back a distance of 0.55 m.
The apple on the stage is 5.00 m higher than the
launching point of the arrow. At what speed does
the arrow (a) leave the bow? (b) strike the apple?
61 . (a) How high a hill can a car coast up (engines
56 . In a “Top Fail” video (https://openstax.org/l/ disengaged) if work done by friction is negligible
21topfailvideo), two women run at each other and its initial speed is 110 km/h? (b) If, in
and collide by hitting exercise balls together. If actuality, a 750-kg car with an initial speed of
each woman has a mass of 50 kg, which 110 km/h is observed to coast up a hill to a
includes the exercise ball, and one woman runs height 22.0 m above its starting point, how much
to the right at 2.0 m/s and the other is running thermal energy was generated by friction? (c)
toward her at 1.0 m/s, (a) how much total kinetic What is the average force of friction if the hill has
energy is there in the system? (b) If energy is a slope of above the horizontal?
conserved after the collision and each exercise
62 . A subway train is brought to a
ball has a mass of 2.0 kg, how fast would the
stop from a speed of 0.500 m/s in 0.400 m by a
balls fly off toward the camera?
large spring bumper at the end of its track. What
57 . In a Coyote/Road Runner cartoon clip
is the spring constant k of the spring?
(https://openstax.org/l/21coyroadcarcl), a spring
63 . A pogo stick has a spring with a spring constant
expands quickly and sends the coyote into a
rock. If the spring extended 5 m and sent the of which can be compressed
coyote of mass 20 kg to a speed of 15 m/s, (a) 12.0 cm. To what maximum height from the
what is the spring constant of this spring? (b) If uncompressed spring can a child jump on the
the coyote were sent vertically into the air with stick using only the energy in the spring, if the
the energy given to him by the spring, how high child and stick have a total mass of 40 kg?
could he go if there were no non-conservative
64 . A block of mass 500 g is attached to a spring of
forces?
spring constant 80 N/m (see the following figure).
58 . In an iconic movie scene, Forrest Gump The other end of the spring is attached to a support
(https://openstax.org/l/21ForrGumpvid) runs while the mass rests on a rough surface with a
around the country. If he is running at a constant coefficient of friction of 0.20 that is inclined at angle
speed of 3 m/s, would it take him more or less of The block is pushed along the surface till the
energy to run uphill or downhill and why? spring compresses by 10 cm and is then released
from rest. (a) How much potential energy was stored
59 . In the movie Monty Python and the Holy Grail
in the block-spring-support system when the block
(https://openstax.org/l/21monpytmovcl) a cow
was just released? (b) Determine the speed of the
is catapulted from the top of a castle wall over to
block when it crosses the point when the spring is
the people down below. The gravitational
neither compressed nor stretched. (c) Determine the
potential energy is set to zero at ground level.
position of the block where it just comes to rest on
The cow is launched from a spring of spring
its way up the incline.
constant that is expanded 0.5 m
from equilibrium. If the castle is 9.1 m tall and
the mass of the cow is 110 kg, (a) what is the
gravitational potential energy of the cow at the
top of the castle? (b) What is the elastic spring