# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 406-411
############################################################

398 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
8. Compareorbitalangularmomentumwithspinangular 16. Discusstheprocessoftheabsorptionoflightbymatter
momentum of an electron in the hydrogen atom. in terms of the atomic structure of the absorbing medium.
9. Listallthepossiblevaluesofsand m foranelectron. 17. NGC1763 is an emission nebula in the Large
s
Magellanic Cloud just outside our Milky Way Galaxy.
Are there particles for which these values are different?
Ultraviolet light from hot stars ionize the hydrogen atoms
inthenebula.Asprotonsandelectronsrecombine,lightin
→ →
10. Are the angular momentum vectors L and S the visible range is emitted. Compare the energies of the
necessarily aligned? photons involved in these two transitions.
11. What is spin-orbit coupling? 18. WhyareX-raysemittedonlyforelectrontransitionsto
innershells?Whattypeofphotonisemittedfortransitions
between outer shells?
8.4The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic
19. Howdotheallowedorbitsforelectronsinatomsdiffer
Table
from the allowed orbits for planets around the sun?
12. What is Pauli’s exclusion principle? Explain the
importanceofthisprinciplefortheunderstandingofatomic
structure and molecular bonding. 8.6Lasers
20. Distinguish between coherent and monochromatic
13. Compare the electron configurations of the elements
light.
in the same column of the periodic table.
21. Whyisametastablestatenecessaryfortheproduction
14. Compare the electron configurations of the elements
of laser light?
that belong in the same row of the periodic table of
elements.
22. Howdoeslightfromanincandescentlightbulbdiffer
from laser light?
8.5Atomic Spectra and X-rays
23. How is a Blu-Ray player able to read more
15. Atomicandmolecularspectraarediscrete.Whatdoes
information that a CD player?
discrete mean, and how are discrete spectra related to the
quantization of energy and electron orbits in atoms and
24. What are the similarities and differences between a
molecules?
CD player and a Blu-Ray player?
PROBLEMS
30. (a) How many angles can L make with the z-axis for
8.1The Hydrogen Atom an l=2 electron? (b) Calculate the value of the smallest
25. The wave function is evaluated at rectangular angle.
coordinates(x, y, z) = (2,1,1)inarbitraryunits.What
are the spherical coordinates of this position? 31. The force on an electron is “negative the gradient
of the potential energy function.” Use this knowledge and
Equation 8.1 to show that the force on the electron in a
26. If an atom has an electron in the n=5 state with
hydrogen atom is given by Coulomb’s force law.
m=3, what are the possible values ofl?
32. Whatisthetotalnumberofstateswithorbitalangular
27. Whatarethepossiblevaluesofmforanelectroninthe momentum l=0? (Ignore electron spin.)
n=4 state?
33. The wave function is evaluated at spherical
28. What,ifany,constraintsdoesavalueof m=1 place coordinates (r, θ, ϕ)=⎛ 3, 45°, 45°⎞, where the value
⎝ ⎠
on the other quantum numbers for an electron in an atom?
oftheradialcoordinateisgiveninarbitraryunits.Whatare
the rectangular coordinates of this position?
29. Whatarethepossiblevaluesofmforanelectroninthe
n=4 state?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 399
34. Coulomb’sforcelawstatesthattheforcebetweentwo 45. For a 3d electron in an external magnetic field of
charged particles is: 2.50×10 −3 T, find (a) the current associated with the
Qq orbital angular momentum, and (b) the maximum torque.
F =k . Use this expression to determine the potential
r2
energy function. 46. An electron in a hydrogen atom is in the n=5,
l=4 state.Findthesmallestanglethemagneticmoment
35. Writeanexpressionforthetotalnumberofstateswith makes with the z-axis. (Express your answer in terms of
orbital angular momentuml. µ )
B.
36. Considerhydrogeninthegroundstate, ψ .(a)Use
100 47. Findtheminimumtorquemagnitude | →τ |thatacts
thederivativetodeterminetheradialpositionforwhichthe
on the orbital magnetic dipole of a 3p electron in an
probability density,P(r), is a maximum.
external magnetic field of 2.50×10 −3 T.
(b)Usetheintegralconcepttodeterminetheaverageradial
position. (This is called the expectation value of the
electron’sradialposition.)Expressyouranswersintoterms 48. Anelectroninahydrogenatomisin3pstate.Findthe
oftheBohrradius, a .Hint:Theexpectationvalueisthe smallestanglethemagneticmomentmakeswiththez-axis.
o
(Express your answer in terms of µ .)
just average value. (c) Why are these values different? B
37. What is the probability that the 1s electron of a 49. Show that U =− → µ · → B .
hydrogen atom is found outside the Bohr radius?
(Hint: An infinitesimal amount of work is done to align
38. Howmanypolaranglesarepossibleforanelectronin the magnetic moment with the external field. This work
the l=5 state? rotatesthemagneticmomentvectorthroughanangle −dθ
(toward the positive z-direction), where dθ is a positive
39. What is the maximum number of orbital angular angle change.)
momentumelectronstatesinthe n=2 shellofahydrogen
atom? (Ignore electron spin.)
8.3Electron Spin
40. What is the maximum number of orbital angular 50. What is the magnitude of the spin momentum of an
momentumelectronstatesinthe n=3 shellofahydrogen electron? (Express you answer in terms of ℏ.)
atom? (Ignore electron spin.)
51. What are the possible polar orientations of the spin
momentum vector for an electron?
8.2Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the
Electron 52. For n=1, write all the possible sets of quantum
41. Find the magnitude of the orbital magnetic dipole numbers (n,l,m, m s ).
moment of the electron in in the 3p state. (Express your
answer in terms of µ .)
B 53. A hydrogen atom is placed in an external uniform
magnetic field (B=200T). Calculate the wavelength of
42. A current of I =2A flows through a square-shaped lightproducedinatransitionfromaspinuptospindown
wirewith2-cmsidelengths.Whatisthemagneticmoment state.
of the wire?
54. If the magnetic field in the preceding problem is
43. Estimate the ratio of the electron magnetic moment quadrupled, what happens to the wavelength of light
tothemuonmagneticmomentforthesamestateoforbital produced in a transition from a spin up to spin down state?
angular momentum. (Hint: m µ=105.7MeV/c2)
55. If the magnetic moment in the preceding problem is
doubled, what happens to the frequency of light produced
44. Find the magnitude of the orbital magnetic dipole in a transition from a spin-up to spin-down state?
moment of the electron in in the 4d state. (Express your
answer in terms of µ
B
.)
56. For n=2, write all the possible sets of quantum
numbers (n,l,m, m ).
s

400 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
69. Theredlightemittedbyarubylaserhasawavelength
8.4The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic of694.3nm.Whatisthedifferenceinenergybetweenthe
initialstateandfinalstatecorrespondingtotheemissionof
Table
the light?
57. (a) How many electrons can be in the n=4 shell?
(b)Whatareitssubshells,andhowmanyelectronscanbe 70. The yellow light from a sodium-vapor street lamp is
in each? producedbyatransitionofsodiumatomsfroma3pstateto
a3sstate.Ifthedifferenceinenergiesofthosetwostatesis
2.10 eV, what is the wavelength of the yellow light?
58. (a)Whatistheminimumvalueoflforasubshellthat
contains 11 electrons?
71. Estimate the wavelength of the K X-ray from
(b) If this subshell is in the n=5 shell, what is the α
calcium.
spectroscopic notation for this atom?
72. Estimatethefrequencyofthe K X-rayfromcesium.
59. Unreasonable result. Which of the following α
spectroscopicnotationsarenotallowed?(a) 5s1 (b) 1d1
73. X-raysareproducedbystrikingatargetwithabeam
(c) 4s3 (d) 3p7 (e) 5g15.Statewhichruleisviolatedfor
of electrons. Prior to striking the target, the electrons are
each notation that is not allowed. accelerated by an electric field through a potential energy
difference:
60. Write the electron configuration for potassium.
ΔU =−eΔV,
61. Write the electron configuration for iron. whereeisthechargeofanelectronand ΔV isthevoltage
difference. If ΔV =15,000 volts, what is the minimum
62. The valence electron of potassium is excited to a 5d wavelength of the emitted radiation?
state. (a) What is the magnitude of the electron’s orbital
angular momentum? (b) How many states are possible
74. For the preceding problem, what happens to the
along a chosen direction?
minimum wavelength if the voltage across the X-ray tube
is doubled?
63. (a) If one subshell of an atom has nine electrons
in it, what is the minimum value of l? (b) What is the
75. Suppose the experiment in the preceding problem is
spectroscopicnotationforthisatom,ifthissubshellispart
conducted with muons. What happens to the minimum
of the n=3 shell? wavelength?
64. Write the electron configuration for magnesium. 76. AnX-raytubeacceleratesanelectronwithanapplied
voltage of 50 kV toward a metal target. (a) What is the
65. Write the electron configuration for carbon. shortest-wavelength X-ray radiation generated at the
target? (b) Calculate the photon energy in eV. (c) Explain
the relationship of the photon energy to the applied
66. Themagnitudesoftheresultantspinsoftheelectrons
voltage.
of the elements B through Ne when in the ground state
are: 3ℏ/2, 2ℏ, 15ℏ/2, 2ℏ, 3ℏ/2, and 0,
77. A color television tube generates some X-rays when
respectively. Argue that these spins are consistent with
its electron beam strikes the screen. What is the shortest
Hund’s rule.
wavelength of these X-rays, if a 30.0-kV potential is used
to accelerate the electrons? (Note that TVs have shielding
to prevent these X-rays from exposing viewers.)
8.5Atomic Spectra and X-rays
67. Whatistheminimumfrequencyofaphotonrequired 78. An X-ray tube has an applied voltage of 100 kV. (a)
to ionize: (a) a He + ion in its ground state? (b) A Li 2+ What is the most energetic X-ray photon it can produce?
Express youranswer inelectron volts andjoules. (b)Find
ion in its first excited state?
the wavelength of such an X-ray.
68. The ion Li 2+ makes an atomic transition from an 79. The maximum characteristic X-ray photon energy
n=4 state to an n=2 state. (a) What is the energy of comes from the capture of a free electron into a K shell
the photon emitted during the transition? (b) What is the vacancy. What is this photon energy in keV for tungsten,
wavelength of the photon? assuming that the free electron has no initial kinetic
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 401
energy? radiation with a wavelength of 10.6µm. In 1.00 ms, this
laser raised the temperature of 1.00cm 3 of flesh to
80. Whataretheapproximateenergiesofthe K and K
α β 100°C and evaporated it. (a) How many photons were
X-rays for copper? required?Youmayassumethatfleshhasthesameheatof
vaporization as water. (b) What was the minimum power
81. Compare the X-ray photon wavelengths for copper output during the flash?
and gold.
84. An excimer laser used for vision correction emits
82. Theapproximateenergiesofthe K and K X-rays UV radiation with a wavelength of 193 nm. (a) Calculate
α β
the photon energy in eV. (b) These photons are used to
for copper are E Kα =8.00keV and E Kβ =9.48keV, evaporate corneal tissue, which is very similar to water in
its properties. Calculate the amount of energy needed per
respectively. Determine the ratio of X-ray frequencies of
molecule of water to make the phase change from liquid
gold to copper, then use this value to estimate the
togas.Thatis,dividetheheatofvaporizationinkJ/kgby
corresponding energies of K and K X-rays for gold.
α β the number of water molecules in a kilogram. (c) Convert
this to eV and compare to the photon energy. Discuss the
implications.
8.6Lasers
83. Acarbondioxidelaserusedinsurgeryemitsinfrared
ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS
85. Forahydrogenatominanexcitedstatewithprincipal magnetic field, and a photon is emitted in the transition
quantum number n, show that the smallest angle that the from a spin-up to spin-down state. The wavelength of the
orbitalangularmomentumvectorcanmakewithrespectto photon is 168µm. What is the strength of the magnetic
thez-axis is θ=cos−1 ⎛ ⎝ n− n 1⎞ ⎠ . field?
93. Showthatthemaximumnumberofelectronstatesin
86. What is the probability that the 1s electron of a thenth shell of an atom is 2n2.
hydrogen atom is found between r =0 and r =∞?
94. The valence electron of chlorine is excited to a 3p
87. Sketchthepotentialenergyfunctionofanelectronin
state. (a) What is the magnitude of the electron’s orbital
a hydrogen atom. (a) What is the value of this function at
angular momentum? (b) What are possible values for the
r =0?inthelimitthat r =∞?(b)Whatisunreasonable
z-component of angular measurement?
or inconsistent with the former result?
95. Which of the following notations are allowed (that
88. Find the value of l, the orbital angular momentum is, which violate none of the rules regarding values of
quantum number, for the Moon around Earth. quantumnumbers)?(a) 1s1; (b) 1d3 ; (c) 4s2; (d) 3p7 ;
(e) 6h20
89. Show that the maximum number of orbital angular
momentum electron states in the nth shell of an atom is
n2.(Ignoreelectronspin.)(Hint:Makeatableofthetotal 96. The ion Be 3+ makes an atomic transition from an
number oforbital angular momentum states foreach shell n=3 state to an n=2 state. (a) What is the energy of
and find the pattern.) the photon emitted during the transition? (b) What is the
wavelength of the photon?
90. What is the magnitude of an electron magnetic
moment? 97. The maximum characteristic X-ray photon energy
comes from the capture of a free electron into a K shell
91. Whatisthemaximumnumberofelectronstatesinthe vacancy. What is this photon frequency for tungsten,
n=5 shell? assuming that the free electron has no initial kinetic
energy?
92. Aground-statehydrogenatomisplacedinauniform
98. Derive an expression for the ratio of X-ray photon

402 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
frequency for two elements with atomic numbers Z and 101. A student in a physics laboratory observes a
1
hydrogen spectrum with a diffraction grating for the
Z .
2 purpose of measuring the wavelengths of the emitted
radiation. In the spectrum, she observes a yellow line and
99. Compare the X-ray photon wavelengths for copper finds its wavelength to be 589 nm. (a) Assuming that this
and silver. is part of the Balmer series, determine n, the principal
i
quantum number of the initial state. (b) What is
100. (a)WhatvoltagemustbeappliedtoanX-raytubeto unreasonableaboutthisresult?(c)Whichassumptionsare
obtain 0.0100-fm-wavelength X-rays for use in exploring unreasonable or inconsistent?
the details of nuclei? (b) What is unreasonable about this
result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or
inconsistent?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9