# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 450-455
############################################################

438 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
At .
Acceleration is increasing, as we expected.
At (and at any time after ), the acceleration is since the thrusters stopped working and
thus no external forces are acting on the spacecraft.
Significance
Notice that the acceleration is not constant; as a result, any dynamical quantities must be calculated either using
integrals, or (more easily) conservation of total energy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.14
What is the physical difference (or relationship) between and in this example?
Rocket in a Gravitational Field
Let’s now analyze the velocity change of the rocket during the launch phase, from the surface of Earth. To keep the
math manageable, we’ll restrict our attention to distances for which the acceleration caused by gravity can be
treated as a constant g.
The analysis is similar, except that now there is an external force of acting on our system. This force
applies an impulse , which is equal to the change of momentum. This gives us
and so
where we have again neglected the term and dropped the vector notation. Next we replace with :
Dividing through by m gives
and integrating, we have
9.39
Unsurprisingly, the rocket’s velocity is affected by the (constant) acceleration of gravity.
Remember that is the burn time of the fuel. Now, in the absence of gravity, Equation 9.38 implies that it makes
no difference how much time it takes to burn the entire mass of fuel; the change of velocity does not depend on .
However, in the presence of gravity, it matters a lot. The −g term in Equation 9.39 tells us that the longer the burn
time is, the smaller the rocket’s change of velocity will be. This is the reason that the launch of a rocket is so
spectacular at the first moment of liftoff: It’s essential to burn the fuel as quickly as possible, to get as large a as
possible.
Access for free at openstax.org

9 • Chapter Review 439
Chapter Review
Key Terms
center of mass weighted average position of the Law of Conservation of Momentum total momentum
mass of a closed system cannot change
closed system system for which the mass is constant linear mass density , expressed as the number of
and the net external force on the system is zero kilograms of material per meter
elastic collision that conserves kinetic energy momentum measure of the quantity of motion that
explosion single object breaks up into multiple an object has; it takes into account both how fast
objects; kinetic energy is not conserved in the object is moving, and its mass; specifically, it is
explosions the product of mass and velocity; it is a vector
external force force applied to an extended object quantity
that changes the momentum of the extended object perfectly inelastic collision after which all objects
as a whole are stuck together, moving with the same velocity;
impulse effect of applying a force on a system for a momentum is conserved, and the loss of kinetic
time interval; this time interval is usually small, but energy is a maximum
does not have to be rocket equation derived by the Soviet physicist
impulse-momentum theorem change of momentum Konstantin Tsiolkovsky in 1897, it gives us the
of a system is equal to the impulse applied to the change of velocity that the rocket obtains from
system burning a mass of fuel that decreases the total
inelastic collision that does not conserve kinetic rocket mass from down to m
energy system object or collection of objects whose motion
internal force force that the simple particles that is currently under investigation; however, your
make up an extended object exert on each other. system is defined at the start of the problem, you
Internal forces can be attractive or repulsive must keep that definition for the entire problem
Key Equations
Definition of momentum
Impulse
Impulse-momentum theorem
Average force from momentum
Instantaneous force from momentum
(Newton’s second law)
Conservation of momentum
Generalized conservation of momentum
Conservation of momentum in two dimensions
External forces
Newton’s second law for an extended object
Acceleration of the center of mass
Position of the center of mass for a system
of particles

440 9 • Chapter Review
Velocity of the center of mass
Position of the center of mass of a
continuous object
Rocket equation
Summary
9.1 Linear Momentum velocities and masses in one-dimensional, two-
body collisions.
• The motion of an object depends on its mass as
well as its velocity. Momentum is a concept that 9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
describes this. It is a useful and powerful
• The approach to two-dimensional collisions is to
concept, both computationally and theoretically.
choose a convenient coordinate system and
The SI unit for momentum is kg m/s.
break the motion into components along
9.2 Impulse and Collisions perpendicular axes.
• Momentum is conserved in both directions
• When a force is applied on an object for some
simultaneously and independently.
amount of time, the object experiences an
• The Pythagorean theorem gives the magnitude of
impulse.
the momentum vector using the x- and
• This impulse is equal to the object’s change of
y-components, calculated using conservation of
momentum.
momentum in each direction.
• Newton’s second law in terms of momentum
states that the net force applied to a system 9.6 Center of Mass
equals the rate of change of the momentum that
• An extended object (made up of many objects)
the force causes.
has a defined position vector called the center of
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum mass.
• The center of mass can be thought of, loosely, as
• The law of conservation of momentum says that
the average location of the total mass of the
the momentum of a closed system is constant in
object.
time (conserved).
• The center of mass of an object traces out the
• A closed (or isolated) system is defined to be one
trajectory dictated by Newton’s second law, due
for which the mass remains constant, and the net
to the net external force.
external force is zero.
• The internal forces within an extended object
• The total momentum of a system is conserved
cannot alter the momentum of the extended
only when the system is closed.
object as a whole.
9.4 Types of Collisions
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
• An elastic collision is one that conserves kinetic
• A rocket is an example of conservation of
energy.
momentum where the mass of the system is not
• An inelastic collision does not conserve kinetic
constant, since the rocket ejects fuel to provide
energy.
thrust.
• Momentum is conserved regardless of whether
• The rocket equation gives us the change of
or not kinetic energy is conserved.
velocity that the rocket obtains from burning a
• Analysis of kinetic energy changes and
mass of fuel that decreases the total rocket
conservation of momentum together allow the
mass.
final velocities to be calculated in terms of initial
Conceptual Questions
9.1 Linear Momentum momentum. Which object has the largest kinetic
energy?
1 . An object that has a small mass and an object
that has a large mass have the same 2 . An object that has a small mass and an object
Access for free at openstax.org

9 • Chapter Review 441
that has a large mass have the same kinetic Explain.
energy. Which mass has the largest momentum?
12 . A rocket in deep space (zero gravity) accelerates
9.2 Impulse and Collisions by firing hot gas out of its thrusters. Does the
rocket constitute a closed system? Explain.
3 . Is it possible for a small force to produce a larger
impulse on a given object than a large force? 9.4 Types of Collisions
Explain.
13 . Two objects of equal mass are moving with
4 . Why is a 10-m fall onto concrete far more equal and opposite velocities when they collide.
dangerous than a 10-m fall onto water? Can all the kinetic energy be lost in the collision?
5 . What external force is responsible for changing 14 . Describe a system for which momentum is
the momentum of a car moving along a conserved but mechanical energy is not. Now
horizontal road? the reverse: Describe a system for which kinetic
energy is conserved but momentum is not.
6 . A piece of putty and a tennis ball with the same
mass are thrown against a wall with the same 9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
velocity. Which object experiences a greater
15 . Momentum for a system can be conserved in
force from the wall or are the forces equal?
one direction while not being conserved in
Explain.
another. What is the angle between the
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum directions? Give an example.
7 . Under what circumstances is momentum 9.6 Center of Mass
conserved?
16 . Suppose a fireworks shell explodes, breaking
8 . Can momentum be conserved for a system if into three large pieces for which air resistance is
there are external forces acting on the system? negligible. How does the explosion affect the
If so, under what conditions? If not, why not? motion of the center of mass? How would it be
affected if the pieces experienced significantly
9 . Explain in terms of momentum and Newton’s
more air resistance than the intact shell?
laws how a car’s air resistance is due in part to
the fact that it pushes air in its direction of 9.7 Rocket Propulsion
motion.
17 . It is possible for the velocity of a rocket to be
10 . Can objects in a system have momentum while greater than the exhaust velocity of the gases it
the momentum of the system is zero? Explain ejects. When that is the case, the gas velocity
your answer. and gas momentum are in the same direction as
that of the rocket. How is the rocket still able to
11 . A sprinter accelerates out of the starting blocks.
obtain thrust by ejecting the gases?
Can you consider him as a closed system?
Problems
9.1 Linear Momentum 7.50 m/s.
b. Calculate the ratio of the elephant’s
18 . An elephant and a hunter are having a confrontation.
momentum to the momentum of a 0.0400-kg
tranquilizer dart fired at a speed of 600 m/s.
c. What is the momentum of the 90.0-kg hunter
running at 7.40 m/s after missing the
elephant?
19 . A skater of mass 40 kg is carrying a box of mass
5 kg. The skater has a speed of 5 m/s with
respect to the floor and is gliding without any
friction on a smooth surface.
a. Calculate the momentum of the 2000.0-kg a. Find the momentum of the box with
elephant charging the hunter at a speed of respect to the floor.

442 9 • Chapter Review
b. Find the momentum of the box with a. Calculate the average force on the person if he
respect to the floor after she puts the box is stopped by a padded dashboard that
down on the frictionless skating surface. compresses an average of 1.00 cm.
b. Calculate the average force on the person if he
20 . A car of mass 2000 kg is moving with a constant is stopped by an air bag that compresses an
velocity of 10 m/s due east. What is the average of 15.0 cm.
momentum of the car?
26 . One hazard of space travel is debris left by
21 . The mass of Earth is and its orbital
previous missions. There are several thousand
radius is an average of . Calculate
objects orbiting Earth that are large enough to
the magnitude of its linear momentum at the
be detected by radar, but there are far greater
location in the diagram.
numbers of very small objects, such as flakes of
paint. Calculate the force exerted by a 0.100-mg
chip of paint that strikes a spacecraft window at
a relative speed of , given the
collision lasts .
27 . A cruise ship with a mass of strikes a
pier at a speed of 0.750 m/s. It comes to rest after
traveling 6.00 m, damaging the ship, the pier, and
the tugboat captain’s finances. Calculate the
average force exerted on the pier using the concept
of impulse. (Hint: First calculate the time it took to
bring the ship to rest, assuming a constant force.)
22 . If a rainstorm drops 1 cm of rain over an area of
10 km2 in the period of 1 hour, what is the
momentum of the rain that falls in one second?
Assume the terminal velocity of a raindrop is 10
m/s. 28 . Calculate the final speed of a 110-kg rugby
player who is initially running at 8.00 m/s but
23 . What is the average momentum of an avalanche
collides head-on with a padded goalpost and
that moves a 40-cm-thick layer of snow over an
experiences a backward force of
area of 100 m by 500 m over a distance of 1 km
for .
down a hill in 5.5 s? Assume a density of 350
kg/m3 for the snow. 29 . Water from a fire hose is directed horizontally
against a wall at a rate of 50.0 kg/s and a speed
24 . What is the average momentum of a 70.0-kg
of 42.0 m/s. Calculate the force exerted on the
sprinter who runs the 100-m dash in 9.65 s?
wall, assuming the water’s horizontal
9.2 Impulse and Collisions momentum is reduced to zero.
25 . A 75.0-kg person is riding in a car moving at 20.0 30 . A 0.450-kg hammer is moving horizontally at
m/s when the car runs into a bridge abutment (see 7.00 m/s when it strikes a nail and comes to rest
the following figure). after driving the nail 1.00 cm into a board.
Assume constant acceleration of the hammer-
nail pair.
a. Calculate the duration of the impact.
b. What was the average force exerted on the
nail?
31 . What is the momentum (as a function of time) of
a 5.0-kg particle moving with a velocity
? What is the net
Access for free at openstax.org