# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 64-69
############################################################

54 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
radiation
energy transferred by electromagnetic waves directly as a result of a temperature difference
rate of conductive heat transfer rate of heat transfer from one material to another
specific heat amount of heat necessary to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of a substance by 1.00°C; also called
“specific heat capacity”
Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation P=σAeT4, where σ =5.67×10 −8 J/s·m2·K4 is the Stefan-Boltzmann
constant,Ais the surface area of the object,Tis the absolute temperature, andeis the emissivity
sublimation phase change from solid to gas
temperature quantity measured by a thermometer, which reflects the mechanical energy of molecules in a system
thermal conductivity property of a material describing its ability to conduct heat
thermal equilibrium conditioninwhichheatnolongerflowsbetweentwoobjectsthatareincontact;thetwoobjects
have the same temperature
thermal expansion change in size or volume of an object with change in temperature
thermal stress stress caused by thermal expansion or contraction
triple point pressure and temperature at which a substance exists in equilibrium as a solid, liquid, and gas
vapor gas at a temperature below the boiling temperature
vapor pressure pressure at which a gas coexists with its solid or liquid phase
zeroth law of thermodynamics lawthatstatesthatiftwoobjectsareinthermalequilibrium,andathirdobjectisin
thermal equilibrium with one of those objects, it is also in thermal equilibrium with the other object
KEY EQUATIONS
Linear thermal expansion ΔL=αLΔT
Thermal expansion in two dimensions ΔA=2αAΔT
Thermal expansion in three dimensions ΔV = βVΔT
Heat transfer Q=mcΔT
Transfer of heat in a calorimeter Q +Q =0
cold hot
Heat due to phase change (melting and freezing) Q=mL
f
Heat due to phase change (evaporation and condensation) Q=mL v
Rate of conductive heat transfer P=
kA⎛
⎝
T h−T
c
⎞
⎠
d
Net rate of heat transfer by radiation P =σeA⎛T 4−T 4⎞
net ⎝ 2 1 ⎠
SUMMARY
1.1Temperature and Thermal Equilibrium
• Temperatureisoperationallydefinedasthequantitymeasuredbyathermometer.Itisproportionaltotheaverage
kinetic energy of atoms and molecules in a system.
• Thermal equilibrium occurs when two bodies are in contact with each other and can freely exchange energy.
Systems are in thermal equilibrium when they have the same temperature.
• The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that when two systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each
other, andBis in thermal equilibrium with a third systemC, thenAis also in thermal equilibrium withC.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 55
1.2Thermometers and Temperature Scales
• Three types of thermometers are alcohol, liquid crystal, and infrared radiation (pyrometer).
• The three main temperature scales are Celsius, Fahrenheit, and Kelvin. Temperatures can be converted from one
scale to another using temperature conversion equations.
• Thethreephasesofwater(ice,liquidwater,andwatervapor)cancoexistatasinglepressureandtemperatureknown
as the triple point.
1.3Thermal Expansion
• Thermalexpansionistheincreaseofthesize(length,area,orvolume)ofabodyduetoachangeintemperature,
usually a rise. Thermal contraction is the decrease in size due to a change in temperature, usually a fall in
temperature.
• Thermal stress is created when thermal expansion or contraction is constrained.
1.4Heat Transfer, Specific Heat, and Calorimetry
• Heat and work are the two distinct methods of energy transfer.
• Heattransfertoanobjectwhenitstemperaturechangesisoftenapproximatedwellby Q=mcΔT, wheremisthe
object’s mass andcis the specific heat of the substance.
1.5Phase Changes
• Mostsubstanceshavethreedistinctphases(underordinaryconditionsonEarth),andtheydependontemperature
and pressure.
• Two phases coexist (i.e., they are in thermal equilibrium) at a set of pressures and temperatures.
• Phase changes occur at fixed temperatures for a given substance at a given pressure, and these temperatures are
called boiling, freezing (or melting), and sublimation points.
1.6Mechanisms of Heat Transfer
• Heat is transferred by three different methods: conduction, convection, and radiation.
• Heat conduction is the transfer of heat between two objects in direct contact with each other.
• The rate of heat transfer P (energy per unit time) is proportional to the temperature difference T
h
−T
c
and the
contact areaAand inversely proportional to the distancedbetween the objects.
• Convection is heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of mass. Convection can be natural or forced, and
generally transfers thermal energy faster than conduction. Convection that occurs along with a phase change can
transfer energy from cold regions to warm ones.
• Radiation is heat transfer through the emission or absorption of electromagnetic waves.
• The rate of radiative heat transfer is proportional to the emissivity e. For a perfect blackbody, e=1, whereas a
perfectly white, clear, or reflective body has e=0, with real objects having values ofebetween 1 and 0.
• The rate of heat transfer depends on the surface area and the fourth power of the absolute temperature:
P=σeAT4,
where σ =5.67×10 −8 J/s·m2·K4 istheStefan-Boltzmannconstantandeistheemissivityofthebody.Thenet
rate of heat transfer from an object by radiation is
Q ⎛ ⎞
net =σeA T 4−T 4 ,
t ⎝ 2 1 ⎠
where T isthetemperatureoftheobjectsurroundedbyanenvironmentwithuniformtemperature T andeisthe
1 2

56 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
emissivity of the object.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
make a new kind of gun. He plans to jam a bullet against
1.1Temperature and Thermal Equilibrium analuminumrodinsideaclosedinvartube.Whenheheats
thetube,therodwillexpandmorethanthetubeandavery
1. What does it mean to say that two systems are in
strong force will build up. Then, by a method yet to be
thermal equilibrium?
determined,hewillopenthetubeinasplitsecondandlet
the force of the rod launch the bullet at very high speed.
2. Give an example in which A has some kind of non-
What is he overlooking?
thermalequilibriumrelationshipwithB,andBhasthesame
relationship with C, but A does not have that relationship
withC.
1.4Heat Transfer, Specific Heat, and
Calorimetry
1.2Thermometers and Temperature Scales
11. How is heat transfer related to temperature?
3. Ifathermometerisallowedtocometoequilibriumwith
the air, and a glass of water is not in equilibrium with the 12. Describe a situation in which heat transfer occurs.
air,whatwillhappentothethermometerreadingwhenitis
placed in the water?
13. Whenheattransfersintoasystem,istheenergystored
as heat? Explain briefly.
4. Give an example of a physical property that varies
with temperature and describe how it is used to measure
14. The brakes in a car increase in temperature by ΔT
temperature.
when bringing the car to rest from a speed v. How much
greater would ΔT be if the car initially had twice the
speed? You may assume the car stops fast enough that no
1.3Thermal Expansion
heat transfers out of the brakes.
5. Pouringcoldwaterintohotglassorceramiccookware
can easily break it. What causes the breaking? Explain
why Pyrex®, a glass with a small coefficient of linear
1.5Phase Changes
expansion, is less susceptible.
15. A pressure cooker contains water and steam in
equilibriumatapressuregreaterthanatmosphericpressure.
6. Onemethodofgettingatightfit,sayofametalpegin
How does this greater pressure increase cooking speed?
a hole in a metal block, is to manufacture the peg slightly
larger than the hole. The peg is then inserted when at a
different temperature than the block. Should the block be 16. As shown below, which is the phase diagram for
hotterorcolderthanthepegduringinsertion?Explainyour carbondioxide,whatisthevaporpressureofsolidcarbon
answer. dioxide(dryice)at −78.5°C? (Notethattheaxesinthe
figure are nonlinear and the graph is not to scale.)
7. Doesitreallyhelptorunhotwateroveratightmetallid
onaglassjarbeforetryingtoopenit?Explainyouranswer.
8. When a cold alcohol thermometer is placed in a hot
liquid, the column of alcohol goes down slightly before
going up. Explain why.
9. Calculatethelengthofa1-meterrodofamaterialwith
thermal expansion coefficient α when the temperature is
raisedfrom300Kto600K.Takingyouranswerasthenew
initial length, find the length after the rod is cooled back
downto300K.Isyouranswer1meter?Shoulditbe?How
can you account for the result you got?
10. Notingthelargestressesthatcanbecausedbythermal
expansion,anamateurweaponinventordecidestouseitto
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 57
25. In winter, it is often warmer in San Francisco than
in Sacramento, 150 km inland. In summer, it is nearly
always hotter in Sacramento. Explain how the bodies of
water surrounding San Francisco moderate its extreme
temperatures.
26. Freeze-driedfoodshavebeendehydratedinavacuum.
Duringtheprocess,thefoodfreezesandmustbeheatedto
facilitatedehydration.Explainbothhowthevacuumspeeds
up dehydration and why the food freezes as a result.
27. In a physics classroom demonstration, an instructor
inflates a balloon by mouth and then cools it in liquid
nitrogen. When cold, the shrunken balloon has a small
amountoflightblueliquidinit,aswellassomesnow-like
crystals. As it warms up, the liquid boils, and part of the
crystals sublime, with some crystals lingering for a while
andthenproducingaliquid.Identifytheblueliquidandthe
two solids in the cold balloon. Justify your identifications
using data fromTable 1.4.
17. Cancarbondioxidebeliquefied atroomtemperature
(20°C)? If so, how? If not, why not? (See the phase 1.6Mechanisms of Heat Transfer
diagram in the preceding problem.)
28. What are the main methods of heat transfer from the
hot core of Earth to its surface? From Earth’s surface to
18. What is the distinction between gas and vapor? outer space?
19. Heat transfer can cause temperature and phase 29. When our bodies get too warm, they respond by
changes. What else can cause these changes? sweatingandincreasingbloodcirculationtothesurfaceto
transfer thermal energy away from the core. What effect
20. How does the latent heat of fusion of water help will those processes have on a person in a 40.0-°C hot
slow the decrease of air temperatures, perhaps preventing tub?
temperaturesfromfallingsignificantlybelow 0°C, inthe
vicinity of large bodies of water? 30. Shown below is a cut-away drawing of a thermos
bottle (also known as a Dewar flask), which is a device
designed specifically to slow down all forms of heat
21. Whatisthetemperatureoficerightafteritisformed
transfer.Explainthefunctionsofthevariousparts,suchas
by freezing water?
thevacuum,thesilveringofthewalls,thethin-walledlong
glassneck,therubbersupport,theairlayer,andthestopper.
22. Ifyouplace 0°C iceinto 0°C waterinaninsulated
container,whatwillthenetresultbe?Willtherebelessice
andmoreliquidwater,ormoreiceandlessliquidwater,or
will the amounts stay the same?
23. Whateffectdoescondensationonaglassoficewater
have on the rate at which the ice melts? Will the
condensation speed up the melting process or slow it
down?
24. In Miami, Florida, which has a very humid climate
and numerous bodies of water nearby, it is unusual for
temperatures to rise above about 38°C (100°F). In the
desertclimateofPhoenix,Arizona,however,temperatures
rise above that almost every day in July and August.
Explain how the evaporation of water helps limit high
temperatures in humid climates.

58 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
33. Onewaytomakeafireplacemoreenergy-efficientis
tohaveroomaircirculatearoundtheoutsideofthefirebox
andbackintotheroom.Detailthemethodsofheattransfer
involved.
34. Oncold,clearnightshorseswillsleepunderthecover
of large trees. How does this help them keep warm?
35. When watching a circus during the day in a large,
dark-colored tent, you sense significant heat transfer from
the tent. Explain why this occurs.
36. Satellitesdesignedtoobservetheradiationfromcold
(3 K) dark space have sensors that are shaded from the
Sun, Earth, and the Moon and are cooled to very low
temperatures. Why must the sensors be at low
temperature?
37. Why are thermometers that are used in weather
stations shielded from the sunshine? What does a
thermometer measure if it is shielded from the sunshine?
31. Someelectricstoveshaveaflatceramicsurfacewith What does it measure if it is not?
heating elements hidden beneath. A pot placed over a
heatingelementwillbeheated,whilethesurfaceonlyafew 38. Puttingalidonaboilingpotgreatlyreducestheheat
centimeters away is safe to touch. Why is ceramic, with a transfer necessary to keep it boiling. Explain why.
conductivity less than that of a metal but greater than that
of a good insulator, an ideal choice for the stove top? 39. Yourhousewillbeemptyforawhileincoldweather,
and you want to save energy and money. Should you turn
32. Loose-fitting white clothing covering most of the thethermostatdowntothelowestlevelthatwillprotectthe
body, shown below, is ideal for desert dwellers, both in house from damage such as freezing pipes, or leave it at
the hot Sun and during cold evenings. Explain how such thenormaltemperature?(Ifyoudon’tlikecomingbacktoa
clothing is advantageous during both day and night. coldhouse,imaginethatatimercontrolstheheatingsystem
so the house will be warm when you get back.) Explain
your answer.
40. You pour coffee into an unlidded cup, intending to
drinkit5minuteslater.Youcanaddcreamwhenyoupour
the cup or right before you drink it. (The cream is at the
same temperature either way. Assume that the cream and
coffeecomeintothermalequilibriumwitheachothervery
quickly.) Which way will give you hotter coffee? What
feature of this question is different from the previous one?
41. Broiling is a method of cooking by radiation, which
produces somewhat different results from cooking by
conduction or convection. A gas flame or electric heating
elementproducesaveryhightemperatureclosetothefood
and above it. Why is radiation the dominant heat-transfer
method in this situation?
42. On a cold winter morning, why does the metal of a
bike feel colder than the wood of a porch?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9