# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 757-760
############################################################

15 • Chapter Review 745
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and function; that is, the initial position, velocity, and
Circular Motion acceleration, when using a sine function? How
about when a cosine function is used?
10 . Can this analogy of SHM to circular motion be
carried out with an object oscillating on a spring 15.5 Damped Oscillations
vertically hung from the ceiling? Why or why not?
15 . Give an example of a damped harmonic
If given the choice, would you prefer to use a
oscillator. (They are more common than
sine function or a cosine function to model the
undamped or simple harmonic oscillators.)
motion?
16 . How would a car bounce after a bump under
11 . If the maximum speed of the mass attached to a
each of these conditions?
spring, oscillating on a frictionless table, was
(a) overdamping
increased, what characteristics of the rotating
(b) underdamping
disk would need to be changed?
(c) critical damping
15.4 Pendulums
17 . Most harmonic oscillators are damped and, if
12 . Pendulum clocks are made to run at the correct undriven, eventually come to a stop. Why?
rate by adjusting the pendulum’s length.
15.6 Forced Oscillations
Suppose you move from one city to another
where the acceleration due to gravity is slightly 18 . Why are soldiers in general ordered to “route
greater, taking your pendulum clock with you, step” (walk out of step) across a bridge?
will you have to lengthen or shorten the
19 . Do you think there is any harmonic motion in the
pendulum to keep the correct time, other factors
physical world that is not damped harmonic
remaining constant? Explain your answer.
motion? Try to make a list of five examples of
13 . A pendulum clock works by measuring the undamped harmonic motion and damped
period of a pendulum. In the springtime the harmonic motion. Which list was easier to make?
clock runs with perfect time, but in the summer
20 . Some engineers use sound to diagnose
and winter the length of the pendulum changes.
performance problems with car engines.
When most materials are heated, they expand.
Occasionally, a part of the engine is designed
Does the clock run too fast or too slow in the
that resonates at the frequency of the engine.
summer? What about the winter?
The unwanted oscillations can cause noise that
14 . With the use of a phase shift, the position of an irritates the driver or could lead to the part
object may be modeled as a cosine or sine failing prematurely. In one case, a part was
function. If given the option, which function located that had a length L made of a material
would you choose? Assuming that the phase with a mass M. What can be done to correct this
shift is zero, what are the initial conditions of problem?
Problems
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion 25 . A stroboscope is set to flash every
. What is the frequency of the
21 . Prove that using will
flashes?
produce the same results for the period for the
oscillations of a mass and a spring. Why do you 26 . A tire has a tread pattern with a crevice every
think the cosine function was chosen? 2.00 cm. Each crevice makes a single vibration
as the tire moves. What is the frequency of these
22 . What is the period of 60.0 Hz of electrical
vibrations if the car moves at 30.0 m/s?
power?
27 . Each piston of an engine makes a sharp sound
23 . If your heart rate is 150 beats per minute during
every other revolution of the engine. (a) How fast
strenuous exercise, what is the time per beat in
is a race car going if its eight-cylinder engine
units of seconds?
emits a sound of frequency 750 Hz, given that
24 . Find the frequency of a tuning fork that takes the engine makes 2000 revolutions per
to complete one oscillation. kilometer? (b) At how many revolutions per
minute is the engine rotating?

746 15 • Chapter Review
28 . A type of cuckoo clock keeps time by having a 0.300-kg mass hangs from it, and a length of
mass bouncing on a spring, usually something 0.750 m when a 1.95-kg mass hangs from it. (a)
cute like a cherub in a chair. What force constant What is the force constant of the spring? (b)
is needed to produce a period of 0.500 s for a What is the unloaded length of the spring?
0.0150-kg mass?
37 . The length of nylon rope from which a mountain
29 . A mass is attached to a spring and hung climber is suspended has an effective force
vertically. The mass is raised a short distance in constant of . (a) What is the
the vertical direction and released. The mass frequency at which he bounces, given his mass
oscillates with a frequency . If the mass is plus and the mass of his equipment are 90.0 kg?
replaced with a mass nine times as large, and (b) How much would this rope stretch to break
the experiment was repeated, what would be the climber’s fall if he free-falls 2.00 m before
the frequency of the oscillations in terms of ? the rope runs out of slack? (Hint: Use
conservation of energy.) (c) Repeat both parts of
30 . A 0.500-kg mass suspended from a spring
this problem in the situation where twice this
oscillates with a period of 1.50 s. How much
length of nylon rope is used.
mass must be added to the object to change the
period to 2.00 s? 15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and
Circular Motion
31 . How much leeway (both percentage and mass)
would you have in the selection of the mass of 38 . The motion of a mass on a spring hung vertically,
the object in the previous problem if you did not where the mass oscillates up and down, can also
wish the new period to be greater than 2.01 s or be modeled using the rotating disk. Instead of
less than 1.99 s? the lights being placed horizontally along the top
and pointing down, place the lights vertically and
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
have the lights shine on the side of the rotating
32 . Fish are hung on a spring scale to determine disk. A shadow will be produced on a nearby
their mass. (a) What is the force constant of the wall, and will move up and down. Write the
spring in such a scale if it the spring stretches equations of motion for the shadow taking the
8.00 cm for a 10.0 kg load? (b) What is the mass position at to be with the
of a fish that stretches the spring 5.50 cm? (c) mass moving in the positive y-direction.
How far apart are the half-kilogram marks on the
39 . (a) A novelty clock has a 0.0100-kg-mass object
scale?
bouncing on a spring that has a force constant of
33 . It is weigh-in time for the local under-85-kg 1.25 N/m. What is the maximum velocity of the
rugby team. The bathroom scale used to assess object if the object bounces 3.00 cm above and
eligibility can be described by Hooke’s law and is below its equilibrium position? (b) How many
depressed 0.75 cm by its maximum load of 120 joules of kinetic energy does the object have at
kg. (a) What is the spring’s effective force its maximum velocity?
constant? (b) A player stands on the scales and
40 . Reciprocating motion uses the rotation of a motor to
depresses it by 0.48 cm. Is he eligible to play on
produce linear motion up and down or back and
this under-85-kg team?
forth. This is how a reciprocating saw operates, as
34 . One type of BB gun uses a spring-driven plunger shown below.
to blow the BB from its barrel. (a) Calculate the
force constant of its plunger’s spring if you must
compress it 0.150 m to drive the 0.0500-kg
plunger to a top speed of 20.0 m/s. (b) What
force must be exerted to compress the spring?
35 . When an 80.0-kg man stands on a pogo stick,
If the motor rotates at 60 Hz and has a radius of 3.0
the spring is compressed 0.120 m. (a) What is
cm, estimate the maximum speed of the saw blade
the force constant of the spring? (b) Will the
as it moves left and right. This design is known as a
spring be compressed more when he hops down
scotch yoke.
the road?
41 . A student stands on the edge of a merry-go-
36 . A spring has a length of 0.200 m when a
Access for free at openstax.org

15 • Chapter Review 747
round which rotates five times a minute and has decrease its length by 5.00%?
a radius of two meters one evening as the sun is
15.5 Damped Oscillations
setting. The student produces a shadow on the
nearby building. (a) Write an equation for the 51 . The amplitude of a lightly damped oscillator
position of the shadow. (b) Write an equation for decreases by during each cycle. What
the velocity of the shadow. percentage of the mechanical energy of the
oscillator is lost in each cycle?
15.4 Pendulums
15.6 Forced Oscillations
42 . What is the length of a pendulum that has a
period of 0.500 s? 52 . How much energy must the shock absorbers of a
1200-kg car dissipate in order to damp a bounce
43 . Some people think a pendulum with a period of
that initially has a velocity of 0.800 m/s at the
1.00 s can be driven with “mental energy” or
equilibrium position? Assume the car returns to
psycho kinetically, because its period is the
its original vertical position.
same as an average heartbeat. True or not, what
is the length of such a pendulum? 53 . If a car has a suspension system with a force
constant of , how much energy
44 . What is the period of a 1.00-m-long pendulum?
must the car’s shocks remove to dampen an
45 . How long does it take a child on a swing to oscillation starting with a maximum
complete one swing if her center of gravity is displacement of 0.0750 m?
4.00 m below the pivot?
54 . (a) How much will a spring that has a force
46 . The pendulum on a cuckoo clock is 5.00-cm constant of 40.0 N/m be stretched by an object
long. What is its frequency? with a mass of 0.500 kg when hung motionless
from the spring? (b) Calculate the decrease in
47 . Two parakeets sit on a swing with their
gravitational potential energy of the 0.500-kg
combined CMs 10.0 cm below the pivot. At what
object when it descends this distance. (c) Part of
frequency do they swing?
this gravitational energy goes into the spring.
48 . (a) A pendulum that has a period of 3.00000 s Calculate the energy stored in the spring by this
and that is located where the acceleration due to stretch, and compare it with the gravitational
gravity is is moved to a location where potential energy. Explain where the rest of the
the acceleration due to gravity is . energy might go.
What is its new period? (b) Explain why so many
55 . Suppose you have a 0.750-kg object on a
digits are needed in the value for the period,
horizontal surface connected to a spring that has
based on the relation between the period and
a force constant of 150 N/m. There is simple
the acceleration due to gravity.
friction between the object and surface with a
49 . A pendulum with a period of 2.00000 s in one static coefficient of friction . (a) How
location ( ) is moved to a new far can the spring be stretched without moving
location where the period is now 1.99796 s. the mass? (b) If the object is set into oscillation
What is the acceleration due to gravity at its new with an amplitude twice the distance found in
location? part (a), and the kinetic coefficient of friction is
, what total distance does it travel
50 . (a) What is the effect on the period of a
before stopping? Assume it starts at the
pendulum if you double its length? (b) What is
maximum amplitude.
the effect on the period of a pendulum if you
Additional Problems
56 . Suppose you attach an object with mass m to a spring without the mass attached and the
vertical spring originally at rest, and let it bounce equilibrium position of the spring with the mass
up and down. You release the object from rest at attached. (a) Show that the spring exerts an
the spring’s original rest length, the length of the upward force of 2.00mg on the object at its
spring in equilibrium, without the mass lowest point. (b) If the spring has a force
attached. The amplitude of the motion is the constant of 10.0 N/m, is hung horizontally, and
distance between the equilibrium position of the the position of the free end of the spring is