# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 657-661
############################################################

13 • Chapter Review 645
Gravitational potential energy beyond Earth
Conservation of energy
Escape velocity
Orbital speed
Orbital period
Energy in circular orbit
Conic sections
Kepler’s third law
Schwarzschild radius
Summary
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation 13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
• All masses attract one another with a • Orbital velocities are determined by the mass of
gravitational force proportional to their masses the body being orbited and the distance from the
and inversely proportional to the square of the center of that body, and not by the mass of a
distance between them. much smaller orbiting object.
• Spherically symmetrical masses can be treated • The period of the orbit is likewise independent of
as if all their mass were located at the center. the orbiting object’s mass.
• Nonsymmetrical objects can be treated as if their • Bodies of comparable masses orbit about their
mass were concentrated at their center of mass, common center of mass and their velocities and
provided their distance from other masses is periods should be determined from Newton’s
large compared to their size. second law and law of gravitation.
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface 13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
• The weight of an object is the gravitational • All orbital motion follows the path of a conic
attraction between Earth and the object. section. Bound or closed orbits are either a circle
• The gravitational field is represented as lines that or an ellipse; unbounded or open orbits are
indicate the direction of the gravitational force; either a parabola or a hyperbola.
the line spacing indicates the strength of the • The areal velocity of any orbit is constant, a
field. reflection of the conservation of angular
• Apparent weight differs from actual weight due momentum.
to the acceleration of the object. • The square of the period of an elliptical orbit is
proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
of that orbit.
• The acceleration due to gravity changes as we
13.6 Tidal Forces
move away from Earth, and the expression for
gravitational potential energy must reflect this • Earth’s tides are caused by the difference in
change. gravitational forces from the Moon and the Sun
• The total energy of a system is the sum of kinetic on the different sides of Earth.
and gravitational potential energy, and this total • Spring or neap (high) tides occur when Earth, the
energy is conserved in orbital motion. Moon, and the Sun are aligned, and neap or (low)
• Objects must have a minimum velocity, the tides occur when they form a right triangle.
escape velocity, to leave a planet and not return. • Tidal forces can create internal heating, changes
• Objects with total energy less than zero are in orbital motion, and even destruction of orbiting
bound; those with zero or greater are bodies.
unbounded.

646 13 • Chapter Review
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity circumstances.
• Black holes, the result of gravitational collapse,
• According to the theory of general relativity,
are singularities with an event horizon that is
gravity is the result of distortions in space-time
proportional to their mass.
created by mass and energy.
• Evidence for the existence of black holes is still
• The principle of equivalence states that that both
circumstantial, but the amount of that evidence
mass and acceleration distort space-time and
is overwhelming.
are indistinguishable in comparable
Conceptual Questions
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation agree with and why?
1 . Action at a distance, such as is the case for 7 . Many satellites are placed in geosynchronous
gravity, was once thought to be illogical and orbits. What is special about these orbits? For a
therefore untrue. What is the ultimate global communication network, how many of
determinant of the truth in science, and why was these satellites would be needed?
this action at a distance ultimately accepted?
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
2 . In the law of universal gravitation, Newton
8 . Are Kepler’s laws purely descriptive, or do they
assumed that the force was proportional to the
contain causal information?
product of the two masses ( ). While all
scientific conjectures must be experimentally 9 . In the diagram below for a satellite in an elliptical
verified, can you provide arguments as to why orbit about a much larger mass, indicate where its
this must be? (You may wish to consider simple speed is the greatest and where it is the least. What
examples in which any other form would lead to conservation law dictates this behavior? Indicate
contradictory results.) the directions of the force, acceleration, and velocity
at these points. Draw vectors for these same three
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
quantities at the two points where the y-axis
3 . Must engineers take Earth’s rotation into intersects (along the semi-minor axis) and from this
account when constructing very tall buildings at determine whether the speed is increasing
any location other than the equator or very near decreasing, or at a max/min.
the poles?
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
4 . It was stated that a satellite with negative total
energy is in a bound orbit, whereas one with zero
or positive total energy is in an unbounded orbit.
Why is this true? What choice for gravitational
potential energy was made such that this is
true?
5 . It was shown that the energy required to lift a
satellite into a low Earth orbit (the change in
potential energy) is only a small fraction of the
kinetic energy needed to keep it in orbit. Is this
true for larger orbits? Is there a trend to the ratio
of kinetic energy to change in potential energy as 13.6 Tidal Forces
the size of the orbit increases?
10 . As an object falls into a black hole, tidal forces
13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy increase. Will these tidal forces always tear the
object apart as it approaches the Schwarzschild
6 . One student argues that a satellite in orbit is in
radius? How does the mass of the black hole and
free fall because the satellite keeps falling
size of the object affect your answer?
toward Earth. Another says a satellite in orbit is
not in free fall because the acceleration due to
gravity is not . With whom do you
Access for free at openstax.org

13 • Chapter Review 647
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity Does the fact that light has no mass make any
difference to the argument?
11 . The principle of equivalence states that all
experiments done in a lab in a uniform 12 . As a person approaches the Schwarzschild
gravitational field cannot be distinguished from radius of a black hole, outside observers see all
those done in a lab that is not in a gravitational the processes of that person (their clocks, their
field but is uniformly accelerating. For the latter heart rate, etc.) slowing down, and coming to a
case, consider what happens to a laser beam at halt as they reach the Schwarzschild radius.
some height shot perfectly horizontally to the (The person falling into the black hole sees their
floor, across the accelerating lab. (View this from own processes unaffected.) But the speed of
a nonaccelerating frame outside the lab.) light is the same everywhere for all observers.
Relative to the height of the laser, where will the What does this say about space as you approach
laser beam hit the far wall? What does this say the black hole?
about the effect of a gravitational field on light?
Problems
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation variations in local geology.)
13 . Evaluate the magnitude of gravitational force 17 . The International Space Station has a mass of
between two 5-kg spherical steel balls approximately 370,000 kg. (a) What is the force on a
separated by a center-to-center distance of 15 150-kg suited astronaut if she is 20 m from the
cm. center of mass of the station? (b) How accurate do
you think your answer would be?
14 . Estimate the gravitational force between two
sumo wrestlers, with masses 220 kg and 240 kg,
when they are embraced and their centers are
1.2 m apart.
15 . Astrology makes much of the position of the
planets at the moment of one’s birth. The only
known force a planet exerts on Earth is
gravitational. (a) Calculate the gravitational force
exerted on a 4.20-kg baby by a 100-kg father
0.200 m away at birth (he is assisting, so he is
close to the child). (b) Calculate the force on the
baby due to Jupiter if it is at its closest distance
to Earth, some away. How does
the force of Jupiter on the baby compare to the FIGURE 13.33 (credit: ©ESA–David Ducros)
force of the father on the baby? Other objects in
18 . Asteroid Toutatis passed near Earth in 2006 at
the room and the hospital building also exert
four times the distance to our Moon. This was
similar gravitational forces. (Of course, there
the closest approach we will have until 2060. If
could be an unknown force acting, but scientists
it has mass of , what force did it
first need to be convinced that there is even an
exert on Earth at its closest approach?
effect, much less that an unknown force causes
it.)
19 . (a) What was the acceleration of Earth caused by
asteroid Toutatis (see previous problem) at its
16 . A mountain 10.0 km from a person exerts a
closest approach? (b) What was the acceleration
gravitational force on the person equal to 2.00%
of Toutatis at this point?
of their weight. (a) Calculate the mass of the
mountain. (b) Compare the mountain’s mass
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
with that of Earth. (c) What is unreasonable
about these results? (d) Which premises are 20 . (a) Calculate Earth’s mass given the acceleration
unreasonable or inconsistent? (Note that due to gravity at the North Pole is measured to
accurate gravitational measurements can easily be and the radius of the Earth at the
detect the effect of nearby mountains and pole is 6356 km. (b) Compare this with the
NASA’s Earth Fact Sheet value of

648 13 • Chapter Review
. rest relative to each other in deep space, use
conservation of energy to find how fast will they
21 . (a) What is the acceleration due to gravity on the
be traveling upon impact. Each sphere has a
surface of the Moon? (b) On the surface of Mars?
radius of 5.10 cm.
The mass of Mars is and its
radius is . 33 . An average-sized asteroid located
from Earth with mass is detected
22 . (a) Calculate the acceleration due to gravity on
headed directly toward Earth with speed of 2.0
the surface of the Sun. (b) By what factor would
km/s. What will its speed be just before it hits
your weight increase if you could stand on the
our atmosphere? (You may ignore the size of the
Sun? (Never mind that you cannot.)
asteroid.)
23 . The mass of a particle is 15 kg. (a) What is its
34 . (a) What will be the kinetic energy of the
weight on Earth? (b) What is its weight on the
asteroid in the previous problem just before it
Moon? (c) What is its mass on the Moon? (d)
hits Earth? b) Compare this energy to the output
What is its weight in outer space far from any
of the largest fission bomb, 2100 TJ. What
celestial body? (e) What is its mass at this point?
impact would this have on Earth?
24 . On a planet whose radius is , the
35 . (a) What is the change in energy of a 1000-kg
acceleration due to gravity is . What is
payload taken from rest at the surface of Earth
the mass of the planet?
and placed at rest on the surface of the Moon?
25 . The mean diameter of the planet Saturn is (b) What would be the answer if the payload
, and its mean mass density is were taken from the Moon’s surface to Earth? Is
. Find the acceleration due to gravity this a reasonable calculation of the energy
at Saturn’s surface. needed to move a payload back and forth?
26 . The mean diameter of the planet Mercury is 13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
, and the acceleration due to
36 . If a planet with 1.5 times the mass of Earth was
gravity at its surface is . Estimate the
traveling in Earth’s orbit, what would its period
mass of this planet.
be?
27 . The acceleration due to gravity on the surface of
37 . Two planets in circular orbits around a star have
a planet is three times as large as it is on the
speeds of v and 2v. (a) What is the ratio of the
surface of Earth. The mass density of the planet
orbital radii of the planets? (b) What is the ratio
is known to be twice that of Earth. What is the
of their periods?
radius of this planet in terms of Earth’s radius?
38 . Using the average distance of Earth from the
28 . A body on the surface of a planet with the same Sun, and the orbital period of Earth, (a) find the
radius as Earth’s weighs 10 times more than it
centripetal acceleration of Earth in its motion
does on Earth. What is the mass of this planet in
about the Sun. (b) Compare this value to that of
terms of Earth’s mass?
the centripetal acceleration at the equator due
to Earth’s rotation.
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
39 . (a) What is the orbital radius of an Earth satellite
29 . Find the escape speed of a projectile from the
having a period of 1.00 h? (b) What is
surface of Mars.
unreasonable about this result?
30 . Find the escape speed of a projectile from the
40 . Calculate the mass of the Sun based on data for
surface of Jupiter.
Earth’s orbit and compare the value obtained
31 . What is the escape speed of a satellite located with the Sun’s actual mass.
at the Moon’s orbit about Earth? Assume the
41 . Find the mass of Jupiter based on the fact that
Moon is not nearby.
Io, its innermost moon, has an average orbital
32 . (a) Evaluate the gravitational potential energy radius of 421,700 km and a period of 1.77 days.
between two 5.00-kg spherical steel balls
42 . Astronomical observations of light from the
separated by a center-to-center distance of 15.0
Milky Way galaxy's stars indicate that it has a
cm. (b) Assuming that they are both initially at
mass of about solar masses. A star
Access for free at openstax.org