# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 225-231
############################################################

5.4 • Mass and Weight 213
Moon, for example, acceleration due to gravity is only . A 1.0-kg mass thus has a weight of 9.8 N on Earth
and only about 1.6 N on the Moon.
The broadest definition of weight in this sense is that the weight of an object is the gravitational force on it from the
nearest large body, such as Earth, the Moon, or the Sun. This is the most common and useful definition of weight in
physics. It differs dramatically, however, from the definition of weight used by NASA and the popular media in
relation to space travel and exploration. When they speak of “weightlessness” and “microgravity,” they are referring
to the phenomenon we call “free fall” in physics. We use the preceding definition of weight, force due to gravity
acting on an object of mass m, and we make careful distinctions between free fall and actual weightlessness.
Be aware that weight and mass are different physical quantities, although they are closely related. Mass is an
intrinsic property of an object: It is a quantity of matter. The quantity or amount of matter of an object is determined
by the numbers of atoms and molecules of various types it contains. Because these numbers do not vary, in
Newtonian physics, mass does not vary; therefore, its response to an applied force does not vary. In contrast, weight
is the gravitational force acting on an object, so it does vary depending on gravity. For example, a person closer to
the center of Earth, at a low elevation such as New Orleans, weighs slightly more than a person who is located in the
higher elevation of Denver, even though they may have the same mass.
It is tempting to equate mass to weight, because most of our examples take place on Earth, where the weight of an
object varies only a little with the location of the object. In addition, it is difficult to count and identify all of the
atoms and molecules in an object, so mass is rarely determined in this manner. If we consider situations in which
is a constant on Earth, we see that weight is directly proportional to mass m, since that is, the more
massive an object is, the more it weighs. Operationally, the masses of objects are determined by comparison with
the standard kilogram, as we discussed in Units and Measurement. But by comparing an object on Earth with one on
the Moon, we can easily see a variation in weight but not in mass. For instance, on Earth, a 5.0-kg object weighs 49
N; on the Moon, where g is , the object weighs 8.4 N. However, the mass of the object is still 5.0 kg on the
Moon.
EXAMPLE 5.8
Clearing a Field
A farmer is lifting some moderately heavy rocks from a field to plant crops. He lifts a stone that weighs 40.0 lb.
(about 180 N). What force does he apply if the stone accelerates at a rate of
Strategy
We were given the weight of the stone, which we use in finding the net force on the stone. However, we also need to
know its mass to apply Newton’s second law, so we must apply the equation for weight, , to determine the
mass.
Solution
No forces act in the horizontal direction, so we can concentrate on vertical forces, as shown in the following free-
body diagram. We label the acceleration to the side; technically, it is not part of the free-body diagram, but it helps
to remind us that the object accelerates upward (so the net force is upward).

214 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
Significance
To apply Newton’s second law as the primary equation in solving a problem, we sometimes have to rely on other
equations, such as the one for weight or one of the kinematic equations, to complete the solution.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.6
For Example 5.8, find the acceleration when the farmer’s applied force is 230.0 N.
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Newton’s third law of motion
• Identify the action and reaction forces in different situations
• Apply Newton’s third law to define systems and solve problems of motion
We have thus far considered force as a push or a pull; however, if you think about it, you realize that no push or pull
ever occurs by itself. When you push on a wall, the wall pushes back on you. This brings us to Newton’s third law.
NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF MOTION
Whenever one body exerts a force on a second body, the first body experiences a force that is equal in
magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that it exerts. Mathematically, if a body A exerts a force on
body B, then B simultaneously exerts a force on A, or in vector equation form,
5.10
Newton’s third law represents a certain symmetry in nature: Forces always occur in pairs, and one body cannot exert
a force on another without experiencing a force itself. We sometimes refer to this law loosely as “action-reaction,”
where the force exerted is the action and the force experienced as a consequence is the reaction. Newton’s third law
has practical uses in analyzing the origin of forces and understanding which forces are external to a system.
We can readily see Newton’s third law at work by taking a look at how people move about. Consider a swimmer
pushing off the side of a pool (Figure 5.16). She pushes against the wall of the pool with her feet and accelerates in
the direction opposite that of her push. The wall has exerted an equal and opposite force on the swimmer. You might
think that two equal and opposite forces would cancel, but they do not because they act on different systems. In
this case, there are two systems that we could investigate: the swimmer and the wall. If we select the swimmer to
be the system of interest, as in the figure, then is an external force on this system and affects its motion.
The swimmer moves in the direction of this force. In contrast, the force acts on the wall, not on our
system of interest. Thus, does not directly affect the motion of the system and does not cancel
The swimmer pushes in the direction opposite that in which she wishes to move. The reaction to her
push is thus in the desired direction. In a free-body diagram, such as the one shown in Figure 5.16, we never include
both forces of an action-reaction pair; in this case, we only use , not .
Access for free at openstax.org

5.5 • Newton’s Third Law 215
FIGURE 5.16 When the swimmer exerts a force on the wall, she accelerates in the opposite direction; in other words, the net external force
on her is in the direction opposite of This opposition occurs because, in accordance with Newton’s third law, the wall exerts a
force on the swimmer that is equal in magnitude but in the direction opposite to the one she exerts on it. The line around the
swimmer indicates the system of interest. Thus, the free-body diagram shows only w (the gravitational force), and BF, which is
the buoyant force of the water supporting the swimmer’s weight. The vertical forces w and BF cancel because there is no vertical
acceleration.
Other examples of Newton’s third law are easy to find:
• As a professor paces in front of a whiteboard, he exerts a force backward on the floor. The floor exerts a
reaction force forward on the professor that causes him to accelerate forward.
• A car accelerates forward because the ground pushes forward on the drive wheels, in reaction to the drive
wheels pushing backward on the ground. You can see evidence of the wheels pushing backward when tires
spin on a gravel road and throw the rocks backward.
• Rockets move forward by expelling gas backward at high velocity. This means the rocket exerts a large
backward force on the gas in the rocket combustion chamber; therefore, the gas exerts a large reaction force
forward on the rocket. This reaction force, which pushes a body forward in response to a backward force, is
called thrust. It is a common misconception that rockets propel themselves by pushing on the ground or on
the air behind them. They actually work better in a vacuum, where they can more readily expel the exhaust
gases.
• Helicopters create lift by pushing air down, thereby experiencing an upward reaction force.
• Birds and airplanes also fly by exerting force on the air in a direction opposite that of whatever force they
need. For example, the wings of a bird force air downward and backward to get lift and move forward.
• An octopus propels itself in the water by ejecting water through a funnel from its body, similar to a jet ski.
• When a person pulls down on a vertical rope, the rope pulls up on the person (Figure 5.17).
FIGURE 5.17 When the mountain climber pulls down on the rope, the rope pulls up on the mountain climber. (credit left: modification of
work by Cristian Bortes)

216 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
There are two important features of Newton’s third law. First, the forces exerted (the action and reaction) are always
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. Second, these forces are acting on different bodies or systems: A’s
force acts on B and B’s force acts on A. In other words, the two forces are distinct forces that do not act on the same
body. Thus, they do not cancel each other.
For the situation shown in Figure 5.6, the third law indicates that because the chair is pushing upward on the boy
with force he is pushing downward on the chair with force Similarly, he is pushing downward with forces
and on the floor and table, respectively. Finally, since Earth pulls downward on the boy with force he pulls
upward on Earth with force . If that student were to angrily pound the table in frustration, he would quickly learn
the painful lesson (avoidable by studying Newton’s laws) that the table hits back just as hard.
A person who is walking or running applies Newton’s third law instinctively. For example, the runner in Figure 5.18
pushes backward on the ground so that it pushes him forward.
FIGURE 5.18 The runner experiences Newton’s third law. (a) A force is exerted by the runner on the ground. (b) The reaction force of the
ground on the runner pushes him forward. (credit "runner": modification of work by "Greenwich Photography"/Flickr)
EXAMPLE 5.9
Forces on a Stationary Object
The package in Figure 5.19 is sitting on a scale. For the scale and package at rest (i.e., not accelerating), show that
the scale indicates the weight of the package.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.5 • Newton’s Third Law 217
FIGURE 5.19 (a) The forces on a package sitting on a scale, along with their reaction forces. The force is the weight of the package (the
force due to Earth’s gravity) and is the force of the scale on the package. (b) Isolation of the package-scale system and the package-Earth
system makes the action and reaction pairs clear.
Strategy
The forces on the package are which is due to the scale, and which is due to Earth’s gravitational field. The
reaction forces that the package exerts are on the scale and on Earth. Because the package is not
accelerating, application of the second law yields
so
The scale reading indicates the magnitude of the force , which is equal to the magnitude of the package’s weight.
Significance
The scale actually does not measure the weight of the package; it measures the force on its surface. If the
system is accelerating, and would not be equal, as explained in Applications of Newton’s Laws.
EXAMPLE 5.10
Getting Up to Speed: Choosing the Correct System
A physics professor pushes a cart of demonstration equipment to a lecture hall (Figure 5.20). Her mass is 65.0 kg,
the cart’s mass is 12.0 kg, and the equipment’s mass is 7.0 kg. Calculate the acceleration produced when the
professor exerts a backward force of 150 N on the floor. All forces opposing the motion, such as friction on the cart’s
wheels and air resistance, total 24.0 N.

218 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.20 A professor pushes the cart with her demonstration equipment. The lengths of the arrows are proportional to the magnitudes
of the forces (except for because it is too small to be drawn to scale). System 1 is appropriate for this example, because it asks for the
acceleration of the entire group of objects. Only and are external forces acting on System 1 along the line of motion. All other forces
either cancel or act on the outside world. System 2 is chosen for the next example so that is an external force and enters into
Newton’s second law. The free-body diagrams, which serve as the basis for Newton’s second law, vary with the system chosen.
Strategy
Since they accelerate as a unit, we define the system to be the professor, cart, and equipment. This is System 1 in
Figure 5.20. The professor pushes backward with a force of 150 N. According to Newton’s third law, the floor
exerts a forward reaction force of 150 N on System 1. Because all motion is horizontal, we can assume there
is no net force in the vertical direction. Therefore, the problem is one-dimensional along the horizontal direction. As
noted, friction f opposes the motion and is thus in the opposite direction of We do not include the forces
or because these are internal forces, and we do not include because it acts on the floor, not on the
system. There are no other significant forces acting on System 1. If the net external force can be found from all this
information, we can use Newton’s second law to find the acceleration as requested. See the free-body diagram in
the figure.
Solution
Newton’s second law is given by
The net external force on System 1 is deduced from Figure 5.20 and the preceding discussion to be
The mass of System 1 is
These values of and m produce an acceleration of
Significance
None of the forces between components of System 1, such as between the professor’s hands and the cart,
contribute to the net external force because they are internal to System 1. Another way to look at this is that forces
Access for free at openstax.org