# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 558-562
############################################################

546 11 • Chapter Review
speed in opposite directions along parallel lines 46 . A satellite is spinning at 6.0 rev/s. The satellite
separated by a distance d. Show that the angular consists of a main body in the shape of a sphere
momentum of this two-particle system is the of radius 2.0 m and mass 10,000 kg, and two
same no matter what point is used as the antennas projecting out from the center of mass
reference for calculating the angular of the main body that can be approximated with
momentum. rods of length 3.0 m each and mass 10 kg. The
antenna’s lie in the plane of rotation. What is the
41 . An airplane of mass flies
angular momentum of the satellite?
horizontally at an altitude of 10 km with a
constant speed of 250 m/s relative to Earth. (a) 47 . A propeller consists of two blades each 3.0 m in
What is the magnitude of the airplane’s angular length and mass 120 kg each. The propeller can
momentum relative to a ground observer be approximated by a single rod rotating about
directly below the plane? (b) Does the angular its center of mass. The propeller starts from rest
momentum change as the airplane flies along a and rotates up to 1200 rpm in 30 seconds at a
constant altitude? constant rate. (a) What is the angular
momentum of the propeller at
42 . At a particular instant, a 1.0-kg particle’s
(b) What is the torque on the
position is , its
propeller?
velocity is , and
48 . A pulsar is a rapidly rotating neutron star. The
the force on it is . (a)
Crab nebula pulsar in the constellation Taurus
What is the angular momentum of the particle
has a period of , radius 10.0 km,
about the origin? (b) What is the torque on the
and mass The pulsar’s
particle about the origin? (c) What is the time
rotational period will increase over time due to
rate of change of the particle’s angular
the release of electromagnetic radiation, which
momentum at this instant?
doesn’t change its radius but reduces its
43 . A particle of mass m is dropped at the point rotational energy. (a) What is the angular
and falls vertically in Earth’s gravitational momentum of the pulsar? (b) Suppose the
field (a) What is the expression for the angular velocity decreases at a rate of
angular momentum of the particle around the . What is the torque on the pulsar?
z-axis, which points directly out of the page as
49 . The blades of a wind turbine are 30 m in length
shown below? (b) Calculate the torque on the
and rotate at a maximum rotation rate of 20 rev/
particle around the z-axis. (c) Is the torque equal
min. (a) If the blades are 6000 kg each and the
to the time rate of change of the angular
rotor assembly has three blades, calculate the
momentum?
angular momentum of the turbine at this
rotation rate. (b) What is the torque require to
rotate the blades up to the maximum rotation
rate in 5 minutes?
50 . A roller coaster has mass 3000.0 kg and needs
to make it safely through a vertical circular loop
of radius 50.0 m. What is the minimum angular
momentum of the coaster at the bottom of the
loop to make it safely through? Neglect friction
on the track. Take the coaster to be a point
44 . (a) Calculate the angular momentum of Earth in particle.
its orbit around the Sun. (b) Compare this
51 . A mountain biker takes a jump in a race and goes
angular momentum with the angular momentum
airborne. The mountain bike is travelling at 10.0
of Earth about its axis.
m/s before it goes airborne. If the mass of the
45 . A boulder of mass 20 kg and radius 20 cm rolls front wheel on the bike is 750 g and has radius
down a hill 15 m high from rest. What is its 35 cm, what is the angular momentum of the
angular momentum when it is half way down the spinning wheel in the air the moment the bike
hill? (b) At the bottom? leaves the ground?
Access for free at openstax.org

11 • Chapter Review 547
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
52 . A disk of mass 2.0 kg and radius 60 cm with a
small mass of 0.05 kg attached at the edge is
rotating at 2.0 rev/s. The small mass, while
attached to the disk, slides gradually to the
center of the disk. What is the disk’s final
rotation rate?
53 . The Sun’s mass is its radius is
and it has a rotational period of
57 . A Molniya orbit is a highly eccentric orbit of a
approximately 28 days. If the Sun should
communication satellite so as to provide continuous
collapse into a white dwarf of radius
communications coverage for Scandinavian
what would its period be if no
countries and adjacent Russia. The orbit is
mass were ejected and a sphere of uniform
positioned so that these countries have the satellite
density can model the Sun both before and
in view for extended periods in time (see below). If a
after?
satellite in such an orbit has an apogee at 40,000.0
54 . A cylinder with rotational inertia km as measured from the center of Earth and a
rotates clockwise about a velocity of 1.68 km/s, what would be its velocity at
vertical axis through its center with angular perigee measured at 200.0 km altitude?
speed A second cylinder with
rotational inertia rotates
counterclockwise about the same axis with
angular speed . If the cylinders
couple so they have the same rotational axis
what is the angular speed of the combination?
What percentage of the original kinetic energy is
lost to friction?
55 . A diver off the high board imparts an initial
rotation with their body fully extended before
going into a tuck and executing three back
somersaults before hitting the water. If their
moment of inertia before the tuck is
and after the tuck during the
somersaults is , what rotation rate
must the diver impart to their body directly off
the board and before the tuck if they take 1.4 s
to execute the somersaults before hitting the
water?
56 . An Earth satellite has its apogee at 2500 km
above the surface of Earth and perigee at 500
km above the surface of Earth. At apogee its
speed is 6260 m/s. What is its speed at perigee?
Earth’s radius is 6370 km (see below).
58 . Shown below is a small particle of mass 20 g
that is moving at a speed of 10.0 m/s when it
collides and sticks to the edge of a uniform solid
cylinder. The cylinder is free to rotate about its
axis through its center and is perpendicular to
the page. The cylinder has a mass of 0.5 kg and
a radius of 10 cm, and is initially at rest. (a) What
is the angular velocity of the system after the

548 11 • Chapter Review
collision? (b) How much kinetic energy is lost in go-round that is 100 kg, has a 1.60-m radius,
the collision? and is spinning at 20.0 rpm. The children have
masses of 22.0, 28.0, and 33.0 kg. If the child
who has a mass of 28.0 kg moves to the center
of the merry-go-round, what is the new angular
velocity in rpm?
64 . (a) Calculate the angular momentum of an ice
skater spinning at 6.00 rev/s given his moment
of inertia is . (b) He reduces his
rate of spin (his angular velocity) by extending
his arms and increasing his moment of inertia.
59 . A bug of mass 0.020 kg is at rest on the edge of
Find the value of his moment of inertia if his
a solid cylindrical disk
angular velocity decreases to 1.25 rev/s. (c)
rotating in a
Suppose instead he keeps his arms in and allows
horizontal plane around the vertical axis through
friction of the ice to slow him to 3.00 rev/s. What
its center. The disk is rotating at 10.0 rad/s. The
average torque was exerted if this takes 15.0 s?
bug crawls to the center of the disk. (a) What is
the new angular velocity of the disk? (b) What is 65 . Twin skaters approach one another as shown below
the change in the kinetic energy of the system? and lock hands. (a) Calculate their final angular
(c) If the bug crawls back to the outer edge of velocity, given each had an initial speed of 2.50 m/s
the disk, what is the angular velocity of the disk relative to the ice. Each has a mass of 70.0 kg, and
then? (d) What is the new kinetic energy of the each has a center of mass located 0.800 m from
system? (e) What is the cause of the increase their locked hands. You may approximate their
and decrease of kinetic energy? moments of inertia to be that of point masses at this
radius. (b) Compare the initial kinetic energy and
60 . A uniform rod of mass 200 g and length 100 cm
final kinetic energy.
is free to rotate in a horizontal plane around a
fixed vertical axis through its center,
perpendicular to its length. Two small beads,
each of mass 20 g, are mounted in grooves along
the rod. Initially, the two beads are held by
catches on opposite sides of the rod’s center, 10
cm from the axis of rotation. With the beads in
this position, the rod is rotating with an angular
velocity of 10.0 rad/s. When the catches are
released, the beads slide outward along the rod.
(a) What is the rod’s angular velocity when the
beads reach the ends of the rod? (b) What is the
rod’s angular velocity if the beads fly off the rod?
61 . A merry-go-round has a radius of 2.0 m and a
66 . A baseball catcher extends his arm straight up to
moment of inertia A boy of mass 50
catch a fast ball with a speed of 40 m/s. The
kg runs tangent to the rim at a speed of 4.0 m/s
baseball is 0.145 kg and the catcher’s arm
and jumps on. If the merry-go-round is initially
length is 0.5 m and mass 4.0 kg. (a) What is the
at rest, what is the angular velocity after the boy
angular velocity of the arm immediately after
jumps on?
catching the ball as measured from the arm
62 . A playground merry-go-round has a mass of 120 socket? (b) What is the torque applied if the
kg and a radius of 1.80 m and it is rotating with catcher stops the rotation of his arm 0.3 s after
an angular velocity of 0.500 rev/s. What is its catching the ball?
angular velocity after a 22.0-kg child gets onto it
67 . In 2015, in Warsaw, Poland, Olivia Oliver of Nova
by grabbing its outer edge? The child is initially
Scotia broke the world record for being the
at rest.
fastest spinner on ice skates. She achieved a
63 . Three children are riding on the edge of a merry- record 342 rev/min, beating the existing
Access for free at openstax.org

11 • Chapter Review 549
Guinness World Record by 34 rotations. If an ice hollow cylinder of mass including people
skater extends her arms at that rotation rate, on the station and a radius of 100.00 m. It is
what would be her new rotation rate? Assume rotating in space at 3.30 rev/min in order to
she can be approximated by a 45-kg rod that is produce artificial gravity. If 100 people of an
1.7 m tall with a radius of 15 cm in the record average mass of 65.00 kg spacewalk to an
spin. With her arms stretched take the awaiting spaceship, what is the new rotation rate
approximation of a rod of length 130 cm with when all the people are off the station?
of her body mass aligned perpendicular to
74 . Neptune has a mass of and is
the spin axis. Neglect frictional forces.
from the Sun with an orbital period
68 . A satellite in a geosynchronous circular orbit is of 165 years. Planetesimals in the outer
42,164.0 km from the center of Earth. A small primordial solar system 4.5 × 109 years ago
asteroid collides with the satellite sending it into coalesced into Neptune over hundreds of
an elliptical orbit of apogee 45,000.0 km. What millions of years. If the primordial disk that
is the speed of the satellite at apogee? Assume evolved into our present day solar system had a
its angular momentum is conserved. radius of km and if the matter that made up
these planetesimals that later became Neptune
69 . A gymnast does cartwheels along the floor and
was spread out evenly on the edges of it, what
then launches herself into the air and executes
was the orbital period of the outer edges of the
several flips in a tuck while she is airborne. If her
primordial disk?
moment of inertia when executing the
cartwheels is and her spin rate is 11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
0.5 rev/s, how many revolutions does she do in
75 . A gyroscope has a 0.5-kg disk that spins at 40
the air if her moment of inertia in the tuck is
rev/s. The center of mass of the disk is 15 cm
and she has 2.0 s to do the flips in
from a pivot with a radius of the disk of 10 cm.
the air?
What is the precession angular velocity?
70 . The centrifuge at NASA Ames Research Center
76 . The precession angular velocity of a gyroscope is
has a radius of 8.8 m and can produce forces on
1.0 rad/s. If the mass of the rotating disk is 0.4
its payload of 20 gs or 20 times the force of
kg and its radius is 30 cm, and the distance from
gravity on Earth. (a) What is the angular
the center of mass to the pivot is 40 cm, what is
momentum of a 20-kg payload that experiences
the rotation rate in rev/s of the disk?
10 gs in the centrifuge? (b) If the driver motor
was turned off in (a) and the payload lost 10 kg, 77 . The axis of Earth makes a angle with a
what would be its new spin rate, taking into direction perpendicular to the plane of Earth’s
account there are no frictional forces present? orbit. As shown below, this axis precesses,
making one complete rotation in 25,780 y.
71 . A ride at a carnival has four spokes to which
(a) Calculate the change in angular momentum
pods are attached that can hold two people. The
in half this time.
spokes are each 15 m long and are attached to a
(b) What is the average torque producing this
central axis. Each spoke has mass 200.0 kg, and
change in angular momentum?
the pods each have mass 100.0 kg. If the ride
(c) If this torque were created by a pair of forces
spins at 0.2 rev/s with each pod containing two
acting at the most effective point on the equator,
50.0-kg children, what is the new spin rate if all
what would the magnitude of each force be?
the children jump off the ride?
72 . An ice skater is preparing for a jump with turns
and has his arms extended. His moment of
inertia is while his arms are
extended, and he is spinning at 0.5 rev/s. If he
launches himself into the air at 9.0 m/s at an
angle of with respect to the ice, how many
revolutions can he execute while airborne if his
moment of inertia in the air is ?
73 . A space station consists of a giant rotating