# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 178-185
############################################################

166 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
The time for projectile motion is determined completely by the vertical motion. Thus, any projectile that has an
initial vertical velocity of 21.2 m/s and lands 10.0 m above its starting altitude spends 3.79 s in the air.
(b) We can find the final horizontal and vertical velocities and with the use of the result from (a). Then, we can
combine them to find the magnitude of the total velocity vector and the angle it makes with the horizontal. Since
is constant, we can solve for it at any horizontal location. We choose the starting point because we know both the
initial velocity and the initial angle. Therefore,
The final vertical velocity is given by Equation 4.21:
Since was found in part (a) to be 21.2 m/s, we have
The magnitude of the final velocity is
The direction is found using the inverse tangent:
Significance
(a) As mentioned earlier, the time for projectile motion is determined completely by the vertical motion. Thus, any
projectile that has an initial vertical velocity of 21.2 m/s and lands 10.0 m above its starting altitude spends 3.79 s in
the air. (b) The negative angle means the velocity is below the horizontal at the point of impact. This result is
consistent with the fact that the ball is impacting at a point on the other side of the apex of the trajectory and
therefore has a negative y component of the velocity. The magnitude of the velocity is less than the magnitude of the
initial velocity we expect since it is impacting 10.0 m above the launch elevation.
Time of Flight, Trajectory, and Range
Of interest are the time of flight, trajectory, and range for a projectile launched on a flat horizontal surface and
impacting on the same surface. In this case, kinematic equations give useful expressions for these quantities, which
are derived in the following sections.
Time of flight
We can solve for the time of flight of a projectile that is both launched and impacts on a flat horizontal surface by
performing some manipulations of the kinematic equations. We note the position and displacement in y must be
zero at launch and at impact on an even surface. Thus, we set the displacement in y equal to zero and find
Factoring, we have
Solving for t gives us
4.24
This is the time of flight for a projectile both launched and impacting on a flat horizontal surface. Equation 4.24
Access for free at openstax.org

4.3 • Projectile Motion 167
does not apply when the projectile lands at a different elevation than it was launched, as we saw in Example 4.8 of
the tennis player hitting the ball into the stands. The other solution, t = 0, corresponds to the time at launch. The
time of flight is linearly proportional to the initial velocity in the y direction and inversely proportional to g. Thus, on
the Moon, where gravity is one-sixth that of Earth, a projectile launched with the same velocity as on Earth would be
airborne six times as long.
Trajectory
The trajectory of a projectile can be found by eliminating the time variable t from the kinematic equations for
arbitrary t and solving for y(x). We take so the projectile is launched from the origin. The kinematic
equation for x gives
Substituting the expression for t into the equation for the position gives
Rearranging terms, we have
4.25
This trajectory equation is of the form which is an equation of a parabola with coefficients
Range
From the trajectory equation we can also find the range, or the horizontal distance traveled by the projectile.
Factoring Equation 4.25, we have
The position y is zero for both the launch point and the impact point, since we are again considering only a flat
horizontal surface. Setting y = 0 in this equation gives solutions x = 0, corresponding to the launch point, and
corresponding to the impact point. Using the trigonometric identity and setting x = R for range,
we find
4.26
Note particularly that Equation 4.26 is valid only for launch and impact on a horizontal surface. We see the range is
directly proportional to the square of the initial speed and , and it is inversely proportional to the
acceleration of gravity. Thus, on the Moon, the range would be six times greater than on Earth for the same initial
velocity. Furthermore, we see from the factor that the range is maximum at These results are shown in
Figure 4.15. In (a) we see that the greater the initial velocity, the greater the range. In (b), we see that the range is
maximum at This is true only for conditions neglecting air resistance. If air resistance is considered, the
maximum angle is somewhat smaller. It is interesting that the same range is found for two initial launch angles that
sum to The projectile launched with the smaller angle has a lower apex than the higher angle, but they both
have the same range.

168 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.15 Trajectories of projectiles on level ground. (a) The greater the initial speed the greater the range for a given initial angle.
(b) The effect of initial angle on the range of a projectile with a given initial speed. Note that the range is the same for initial angles of
and although the maximum heights of those paths are different.
EXAMPLE 4.9
Comparing Golf Shots
A golfer encounters two different situations on different holes. On the second hole they are 120 m from the green
and want to hit the ball 90 m and let it run onto the green. They angle the shot low to the ground at to the
horizontal to let the ball roll after impact. On the fourth hole they are 90 m from the green and want to let the ball
drop with a minimum amount of rolling after impact. Here, they angle the shot at to the horizontal to minimize
rolling after impact. Both shots are hit and impacted on a level surface.
(a) What is the initial speed of the ball at the second hole?
(b) What is the initial speed of the ball at the fourth hole?
(c) Write the trajectory equation for both cases.
(d) Graph the trajectories.
Strategy
We see that the range equation has the initial speed and angle, so we can solve for the initial speed for both (a) and
(b). When we have the initial speed, we can use this value to write the trajectory equation.
Solution
(a)
(b)
Access for free at openstax.org

4.3 • Projectile Motion 169
(c)
(d) Using a graphing utility, we can compare the two trajectories, which are shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.16 Two trajectories of a golf ball with a range of 90 m. The impact points of both are at the same level as the launch point.
Significance
The initial speed for the shot at is greater than the initial speed of the shot at Note from Figure 4.16 that if
the two projectiles were launched at the same speed but at different angles, the projectiles would have the same
range as long as the angles were less than The launch angles in this example add to give a number greater than
Thus, the shot at has to have a greater launch speed to reach 90 m, otherwise it would land at a shorter
distance.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.4
If the two golf shots in Example 4.9 were launched at the same speed, which shot would have the greatest range?
When we speak of the range of a projectile on level ground, we assume R is very small compared with the
circumference of Earth. If, however, the range is large, Earth curves away below the projectile and the acceleration
resulting from gravity changes direction along the path. The range is larger than predicted by the range equation
given earlier because the projectile has farther to fall than it would on level ground, as shown in Figure 4.17, which
is based on a drawing in Newton’s Principia. If the initial speed is great enough, the projectile goes into orbit. Earth’s
surface drops 5 m every 8000 m. In 1 s an object falls 5 m without air resistance. Thus, if an object is given a

170 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
horizontal velocity of 8000 m/s (or 18,000 mi/hr) near Earth’s surface, it will go into orbit around the planet because
the surface continuously falls away from the object. This is roughly the speed of the Space Shuttle in a low Earth
orbit when it was operational, or any satellite in a low Earth orbit. These and other aspects of orbital motion, such as
Earth’s rotation, are covered in greater depth in Gravitation.
FIGURE 4.17 Projectile to satellite. In each case shown here, a projectile is launched from a very high tower to avoid air resistance. With
increasing initial speed, the range increases and becomes longer than it would be on level ground because Earth curves away beneath its
path. With a speed of 8000 m/s, orbit is achieved.
INTERACTIVE
At PhET Explorations: Projectile Motion (https://openstax.org/l/21phetpromot), learn about projectile motion in
terms of the launch angle and initial velocity.
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Solve for the centripetal acceleration of an object moving on a circular path.
• Use the equations of circular motion to find the position, velocity, and acceleration of a particle executing
circular motion.
• Explain the differences between centripetal acceleration and tangential acceleration resulting from
nonuniform circular motion.
• Evaluate centripetal and tangential acceleration in nonuniform circular motion, and find the total
acceleration vector.
Uniform circular motion is a specific type of motion in which an object travels in a circle with a constant speed. For
example, any point on a propeller spinning at a constant rate is executing uniform circular motion. Other examples
are the second, minute, and hour hands of a watch. It is remarkable that points on these rotating objects are
actually accelerating, although the rotation rate is a constant. To see this, we must analyze the motion in terms of
vectors.
Centripetal Acceleration
In one-dimensional kinematics, objects with a constant speed have zero acceleration. However, in two- and three-
dimensional kinematics, even if the speed is a constant, a particle can have acceleration if it moves along a curved
trajectory such as a circle. In this case the velocity vector is changing, or This is shown in Figure 4.18. As
the particle moves counterclockwise in time on the circular path, its position vector moves from to
Access for free at openstax.org

4.4 • Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion 171
The velocity vector has constant magnitude and is tangent to the path as it changes from to changing
its direction only. Since the velocity vector is perpendicular to the position vector the triangles formed by
the position vectors and and the velocity vectors and are similar. Furthermore, since and
the two triangles are isosceles. From these facts we can make the assertion
or
FIGURE 4.18 (a) A particle is moving in a circle at a constant speed, with position and velocity vectors at times and (b) Velocity
vectors forming a triangle. The two triangles in the figure are similar. The vector points toward the center of the circle in the limit
We can find the magnitude of the acceleration from
The direction of the acceleration can also be found by noting that as and therefore approach zero, the vector
approaches a direction perpendicular to In the limit is perpendicular to Since is tangent to the
circle, the acceleration points toward the center of the circle. Summarizing, a particle moving in a circle at a
constant speed has an acceleration with magnitude
4.27
The direction of the acceleration vector is toward the center of the circle (Figure 4.19). This is a radial acceleration
and is called the centripetal acceleration, which is why we give it the subscript c. The word centripetal comes from
the Latin words centrum (meaning “center”) and petere (meaning “to seek”), and thus takes the meaning “center
seeking.”

172 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.19 The centripetal acceleration vector points toward the center of the circular path of motion and is an acceleration in the radial
direction. The velocity vector is also shown and is tangent to the circle.
Let’s investigate some examples that illustrate the relative magnitudes of the velocity, radius, and centripetal
acceleration.
EXAMPLE 4.10
Creating an Acceleration of 1 g
A jet is flying at 134.1 m/s along a straight line and makes a turn along a circular path level with the ground. What
does the radius of the circle have to be to produce a centripetal acceleration of 1 g on the pilot and jet toward the
center of the circular trajectory?
Strategy
Given the speed of the jet, we can solve for the radius of the circle in the expression for the centripetal acceleration.
Solution
Set the centripetal acceleration equal to the acceleration of gravity:
Solving for the radius, we find
Significance
To create a greater acceleration than g on the pilot, the jet would either have to decrease the radius of its circular
trajectory or increase its speed on its existing trajectory or both.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.5
A flywheel has a radius of 20.0 cm. What is the speed of a point on the edge of the flywheel if it experiences a
centripetal acceleration of
Centripetal acceleration can have a wide range of values, depending on the speed and radius of curvature of the
circular path. Typical centripetal accelerations are given in the following table.
Object Centripetal Acceleration (m/s2 or factors of g)
Earth around the Sun
Moon around the Earth
TABLE 4.1 Typical Centripetal Accelerations
Access for free at openstax.org