# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 785-791
############################################################

16.4 • Energy and Power of a Wave 773
4. The angular frequency can be found from the frequency:
5. Calculate the time-averaged power:
Significance
The time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave is proportional to the square of the amplitude of the wave and the
square of the angular frequency of the wave. This is true for most mechanical waves. If either the angular frequency
or the amplitude of the wave were doubled, the power would increase by a factor of four. The time-averaged power
of the wave on a string is also proportional to the speed of the sinusoidal wave on the string. If the speed were
doubled, by increasing the tension by a factor of four, the power would also be doubled.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.6
Is the time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave on a string proportional to the linear density of the string?
The equations for the energy of the wave and the time-averaged power were derived for a sinusoidal wave on a
string. In general, the energy of a mechanical wave and the power are proportional to the amplitude squared and to
the angular frequency squared (and therefore the frequency squared).
Another important characteristic of waves is the intensity of the waves. Waves can also be concentrated or spread
out. Waves from an earthquake, for example, spread out over a larger area as they move away from a source, so they
do less damage the farther they get from the source. Changing the area the waves cover has important effects. All
these pertinent factors are included in the definition of intensity (I) as power per unit area:
16.11
where P is the power carried by the wave through area A. The definition of intensity is valid for any energy in transit,
including that carried by waves. The SI unit for intensity is watts per square meter (W/m2). Many waves are
spherical waves that move out from a source as a sphere. For example, a sound speaker mounted on a post above
the ground may produce sound waves that move away from the source as a spherical wave. Sound waves are
discussed in more detail in the next chapter, but in general, the farther you are from the speaker, the less intense the
sound you hear. As a spherical wave moves out from a source, the surface area of the wave increases as the radius
increases The intensity for a spherical wave is therefore
16.12
If there are no dissipative forces, the energy will remain constant as the spherical wave moves away from the
source, but the intensity will decrease as the surface area increases.
In the case of the two-dimensional circular wave, the wave moves out, increasing the circumference of the wave as
the radius of the circle increases. If you toss a pebble in a pond, the surface ripple moves out as a circular wave. As
the ripple moves away from the source, the amplitude decreases. The energy of the wave spreads around a larger
circumference and the intensity decreases proportional to which is also the same in the case of a spherical wave,
since intensity is proportional to the amplitude squared.

774 16 • Waves
16.5 Interference of Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how mechanical waves are reflected and transmitted at the boundaries of a medium
• Define the terms interference and superposition
• Find the resultant wave of two identical sinusoidal waves that differ only by a phase shift
Up to now, we have been studying mechanical waves that propagate continuously through a medium, but we have
not discussed what happens when waves encounter the boundary of the medium or what happens when a wave
encounters another wave propagating through the same medium. Waves do interact with boundaries of the medium,
and all or part of the wave can be reflected. For example, when you stand some distance from a rigid cliff face and
yell, you can hear the sound waves reflect off the rigid surface as an echo. Waves can also interact with other waves
propagating in the same medium. If you throw two rocks into a pond some distance from one another, the circular
ripples that result from the two stones seem to pass through one another as they propagate out from where the
stones entered the water. This phenomenon is known as interference. In this section, we examine what happens to
waves encountering a boundary of a medium or another wave propagating in the same medium. We will see that
their behavior is quite different from the behavior of particles and rigid bodies. Later, when we study modern
physics, we will see that only at the scale of atoms do we see similarities in the properties of waves and particles.
Reflection and Transmission
When a wave propagates through a medium, it reflects when it encounters the boundary of the medium. The wave
before hitting the boundary is known as the incident wave. The wave after encountering the boundary is known as
the reflected wave. How the wave is reflected at the boundary of the medium depends on the boundary conditions;
waves will react differently if the boundary of the medium is fixed in place or free to move (Figure 16.17). A fixed
boundary condition exists when the medium at a boundary is fixed in place so it cannot move. A free boundary
condition exists when the medium at the boundary is free to move.
FIGURE 16.17 (a) One end of a string is fixed so that it cannot move. A wave propagating on the string, encountering this fixed boundary
condition, is reflected out of phase with respect to the incident wave. (b) One end of a string is tied to a solid ring of negligible
mass on a frictionless lab pole, where the ring is free to move. A wave propagating on the string, encountering this free boundary condition,
is reflected in phase with respect to the wave.
Part (a) of the Figure 16.17 shows a fixed boundary condition. Here, one end of the string is fixed to a wall so the end
of the string is fixed in place and the medium (the string) at the boundary cannot move. When the wave is reflected,
Access for free at openstax.org

16.5 • Interference of Waves 775
the amplitude of the reflected wave is exactly the same as the amplitude of the incident wave, but the reflected
wave is reflected out of phase with respect to the incident wave. The phase change can be explained
using Newton’s third law: Recall that Newton’s third law states that when object A exerts a force on object B, then
object B exerts an equal and opposite force on object A. As the incident wave encounters the wall, the string exerts
an upward force on the wall and the wall reacts by exerting an equal and opposite force on the string. The reflection
at a fixed boundary is inverted. Note that the figure shows a crest of the incident wave reflected as a trough. If the
incident wave were a trough, the reflected wave would be a crest.
Part (b) of the figure shows a free boundary condition. Here, one end of the string is tied to a solid ring of negligible
mass on a frictionless pole, so the end of the string is free to move up and down. As the incident wave encounters
the boundary of the medium, it is also reflected. In the case of a free boundary condition, the reflected wave is in
phase with respect to the incident wave. In this case, the wave encounters the free boundary applying an upward
force on the ring, accelerating the ring up. The ring travels up to the maximum height equal to the amplitude of the
wave and then accelerates down towards the equilibrium position due to the tension in the string. The figure shows
the crest of an incident wave being reflected in phase with respect to the incident wave as a crest. If the incident
wave were a trough, the reflected wave would also be a trough. The amplitude of the reflected wave would be equal
to the amplitude of the incident wave.
In some situations, the boundary of the medium is neither fixed nor free. Consider Figure 16.18(a), where a low-
linear mass density string is attached to a string of a higher linear mass density. In this case, the reflected wave is
out of phase with respect to the incident wave. There is also a transmitted wave that is in phase with respect to the
incident wave. Both the transmitted and the reflected waves have amplitudes less than the amplitude of the
incident wave. If the tension is the same in both strings, the wave speed is higher in the string with the lower linear
mass density.
FIGURE 16.18 Waves traveling along two types of strings: a thick string with a high linear density and a thin string with a low linear density.
Both strings are under the same tension, so a wave moves faster on the low-density string than on the high-density string. (a) A wave
moving from a low-density to a high-density medium results in a reflected wave that is out of phase with respect to the
incident pulse (or wave) and a transmitted wave that is in phase with the incident wave. (b) When a wave moves from a high-density
medium to a low-density medium, both the reflected and transmitted wave are in phase with respect to the incident wave.
Part (b) of the figure shows a high-linear mass density string is attached to a string of a lower linear density. In this
case, the reflected wave is in phase with respect to the incident wave. There is also a transmitted wave that is in
phase with respect to the incident wave. Both the incident and the reflected waves have amplitudes less than the

776 16 • Waves
amplitude of the incident wave. Here you may notice that if the tension is the same in both strings, the wave speed
is higher in the string with the lower linear mass density.
Superposition and Interference
Most waves do not look very simple. Complex waves are more interesting, even beautiful, but they look formidable.
Most interesting mechanical waves consist of a combination of two or more traveling waves propagating in the same
medium. The principle of superposition can be used to analyze the combination of waves.
Consider two simple pulses of the same amplitude moving toward one another in the same medium, as shown in
Figure 16.19. Eventually, the waves overlap, producing a wave that has twice the amplitude, and then continue on
unaffected by the encounter. The pulses are said to interfere, and this phenomenon is known as interference.
FIGURE 16.19 Two pulses moving toward one another experience interference. The term interference refers to what happens when two
waves overlap.
To analyze the interference of two or more waves, we use the principle of superposition. For mechanical waves, the
principle of superposition states that if two or more traveling waves combine at the same point, the resulting
position of the mass element of the medium, at that point, is the algebraic sum of the position due to the individual
waves. This property is exhibited by many waves observed, such as waves on a string, sound waves, and surface
water waves. Electromagnetic waves also obey the superposition principle, but the electric and magnetic fields of
the combined wave are added instead of the displacement of the medium. Waves that obey the superposition
principle are linear waves; waves that do not obey the superposition principle are said to be nonlinear waves. In this
chapter, we deal with linear waves, in particular, sinusoidal waves.
The superposition principle can be understood by considering the linear wave equation. In Mathematics of a Wave,
we defined a linear wave as a wave whose mathematical representation obeys the linear wave equation. For a
transverse wave on a string with an elastic restoring force, the linear wave equation is
Access for free at openstax.org

16.5 • Interference of Waves 777
Any wave function where the argument of the function is linear is a solution to the
linear wave equation and is a linear wave function. If wave functions and are solutions to the linear
wave equation, the sum of the two functions is also a solution to the linear wave equation.
Mechanical waves that obey superposition are normally restricted to waves with amplitudes that are small with
respect to their wavelengths. If the amplitude is too large, the medium is distorted past the region where the
restoring force of the medium is linear.
Waves can interfere constructively or destructively. Figure 16.20 shows two identical sinusoidal waves that arrive at
the same point exactly in phase. Figure 16.20(a) and (b) show the two individual waves, Figure 16.20(c) shows the
resultant wave that results from the algebraic sum of the two linear waves. The crests of the two waves are precisely
aligned, as are the troughs. This superposition produces constructive interference. Because the disturbances add,
constructive interference produces a wave that has twice the amplitude of the individual waves, but has the same
wavelength.
Figure 16.21 shows two identical waves that arrive exactly out of phase, producing destructive interference.
Figure 16.21(a) and (b) show the individual waves, and Figure 16.21(c) shows the superposition of the two waves.
Because the troughs of one wave add the crest of the other wave, the resulting amplitude is zero for destructive
interference—the waves completely cancel.
FIGURE 16.20 Constructive interference of two identical waves produces a wave with twice the amplitude, but the same wavelength.

778 16 • Waves
FIGURE 16.21 Destructive interference of two identical waves, one with a phase shift of , produces zero amplitude, or
complete cancellation.
When linear waves interfere, the resultant wave is just the algebraic sum of the individual waves as stated in the
principle of superposition. Figure 16.22 shows two waves (red and blue) and the resultant wave (black). The
resultant wave is the algebraic sum of the two individual waves.
Access for free at openstax.org