# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 99-103
############################################################

2 • Chapter Review 87
methods, which are approximate. multiplying their magnitudes with the cosine of
• Analytical methods of vector algebra are used the angle between them. The scalar product of
routinely in mechanics, electricity, and orthogonal vectors vanishes; the scalar product
magnetism. They are important mathematical of antiparallel vectors is negative.
tools of physics. • The vector product of two vectors is a vector
perpendicular to both of them. Its magnitude is
2.4 Products of Vectors
obtained by multiplying their magnitudes by the
• There are two kinds of multiplication for vectors. sine of the angle between them. The direction of
One kind of multiplication is the scalar product, the vector product can be determined by the
also known as the dot product. The other kind of corkscrew right-hand rule. The vector product of
multiplication is the vector product, also known two either parallel or antiparallel vectors
as the cross product. The scalar product of vanishes. The magnitude of the vector product is
vectors is a number (scalar). The vector product largest for orthogonal vectors.
of vectors is a vector. • The scalar product of vectors is used to find
• Both kinds of multiplication have the distributive angles between vectors and in the definitions of
property, but only the scalar product has the derived scalar physical quantities such as work
commutative property. The vector product has or energy.
the anticommutative property, which means that • The cross product of vectors is used in definitions
when we change the order in which two vectors of derived vector physical quantities such as
are multiplied, the result acquires a minus sign. torque or magnetic force, and in describing
• The scalar product of two vectors is obtained by rotations.
Conceptual Questions
2.1 Scalars and Vectors zero? Explain.
1 . A weather forecast states the temperature is 8 . Does the odometer in an automobile indicate a
predicted to be the following day. Is this scalar or a vector quantity?
temperature a vector or a scalar quantity?
9 . When a 10,000-m runner competing on a 400-m
Explain.
track crosses the finish line, what is the runner’s
2 . Which of the following is a vector: a person’s net displacement? Can this displacement be
height, the altitude on Mt. Everest, the velocity zero? Explain.
of a fly, the age of Earth, the boiling point of
10 . A vector has zero magnitude. Is it necessary to
water, the cost of a book, Earth’s population, or
specify its direction? Explain.
the acceleration of gravity?
11 . Can a magnitude of a vector be negative?
3 . Give a specific example of a vector, stating its
magnitude, units, and direction. 12 . Can the magnitude of a particle’s displacement
be greater than the distance traveled?
4 . What do vectors and scalars have in common?
How do they differ? 13 . If two vectors are equal, what can you say about
their components? What can you say about their
5 . Suppose you add two vectors and . What
magnitudes? What can you say about their
relative direction between them produces the
directions?
resultant with the greatest magnitude? What is
14 . If three vectors sum up to zero, what geometric
the maximum magnitude? What relative
condition do they satisfy?
direction between them produces the resultant
with the smallest magnitude? What is the
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
minimum magnitude?
15 . Give an example of a nonzero vector that has a
6 . Is it possible to add a scalar quantity to a vector
component of zero.
quantity?
16 . Explain why a vector cannot have a component
7 . Is it possible for two vectors of different
greater than its own magnitude.
magnitudes to add to zero? Is it possible for
three vectors of different magnitudes to add to 17 . If two vectors are equal, what can you say about
their components?

88 2 • Chapter Review
18 . If vectors and are orthogonal, what is the , (c) , (d) , (e)
component of along the direction of ? What , (f) , (g)
is the component of along the direction of ? , (h) , (i) ,
and (j) .
19 . If one of the two components of a vector is not
zero, can the magnitude of the other vector 22 . If the cross product of two vectors vanishes,
component of this vector be zero? what can you say about their directions?
20 . If two vectors have the same magnitude, do 23 . If the dot product of two vectors vanishes, what
their components have to be the same? can you say about their directions?
2.4 Products of Vectors 24 . What is the dot product of a vector with the
cross product that this vector has with another
21 . What is wrong with the following expressions?
vector?
How can you correct them? (a) , (b)
Problems
2.1 Scalars and Vectors (f) , (g) ; and (h) .
25 . A scuba diver makes a slow descent into the
depths of the ocean. His vertical position with
respect to a boat on the surface changes several
times. He makes the first stop 9.0 m from the
boat but has a problem with equalizing the
pressure, so he ascends 3.0 m and then
continues descending for another 12.0 m to the
second stop. From there, he ascends 4 m and
then descends for 18.0 m, ascends again for 7 m
and descends again for 24.0 m, where he makes
a stop, waiting for his buddy. Assuming the
positive direction up to the surface, express his
net vertical displacement vector in terms of the
unit vector. What is his distance to the boat?
26 . In a tug-of-war game on one campus, 15
students pull on a rope at both ends in an effort
to displace the central knot to one side or the
other. Two students pull with force 196 N each
to the right, four students pull with force 98 N
each to the left, five students pull with force 62
N each to the left, three students pull with force
150 N each to the right, and one student pulls
with force 250 N to the left. Assuming the
29 . A delivery driver starts at the post office, drives
positive direction to the right, express the net
40 km north, then 20 km west, then 60 km
pull on the knot in terms of the unit vector. How
northeast, and finally 50 km north to stop for
big is the net pull on the knot? In what direction?
lunch. Use a graphical method to find their net
27 . Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight west and then displacement vector.
25.0 m straight north. How far are you from your
30 . An adventurous dog strays from home, runs
starting point and what is the compass direction
three blocks east, two blocks north, one block
of a line connecting your starting point to your
east, one block north, and two blocks west.
final position? Use a graphical method.
Assuming that each block is about 100 m, how
28 . For the vectors given in the following figure, use a far from home and in what direction is the dog?
graphical method to find the following resultants: (a) Use a graphical method.
, (b) , (c) , (d) , (e) ,
31 . In an attempt to escape a desert island, a
Access for free at openstax.org

2 • Chapter Review 89
castaway builds a raft and sets out to sea. The resultant
wind shifts a great deal during the day and he is
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
blown along the following directions: 2.50 km
and north of west, then 4.70 km and
37 . Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal and points to the
south of east, then 1.30 km and south of
right, resolve the vectors given in the following
west, then 5.10 km straight east, then 1.70 km
figure to their scalar components and express them
and east of north, then 7.20 km and
in vector component form.
south of west, and finally 2.80 km and
north of east. Use a graphical method to find the
castaway’s final position relative to the island.
32 . A small plane flies 40.0 km in a direction
north of east and then flies 30.0 km in a
direction north of east. Use a graphical
method to find the total distance the plane
covers from the starting point and the direction
of the path to the final position.
33 . A trapper walks a 5.0-km straight-line distance from
his cabin to the lake, as shown in the following
figure. Use a graphical method (the parallelogram
rule) to determine the trapper’s displacement
directly to the east and displacement directly to the
north that sum up to his resultant displacement
vector. If the trapper walked only in directions east
and north, zigzagging his way to the lake, how many
kilometers would he have to walk to get to the lake?
38 . Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight west and then
25.0 m straight north. How far are you from your
starting point? What is your displacement
vector? What is the direction of your
displacement? Assume the +x-axis is to the
east.
39 . You drive 7.50 km in a straight line in a direction
34 . A surveyor measures the distance across a river
east of north. (a) Find the distances you
that flows straight north by the following
would have to drive straight east and then
method. Starting directly across from a tree on
straight north to arrive at the same point. (b)
the opposite bank, the surveyor walks 100 m
Show that you still arrive at the same point if the
along the river to establish a baseline. She then
east and north legs are reversed in order.
sights across to the tree and reads that the angle
Assume the +x-axis is to the east.
from the baseline to the tree is . How wide is
the river? 40 . A sledge is being pulled by two horses on a flat
terrain. The net force on the sledge can be
35 . A pedestrian walks 6.0 km east and then 13.0
expressed in the Cartesian coordinate system as
km north. Use a graphical method to find the
vector , where
pedestrian’s resultant displacement and
and denote directions to the east and north,
geographic direction.
respectively. Find the magnitude and direction of
36 . The magnitudes of two displacement vectors are the pull.
A = 20 m and B = 6 m. What are the largest and
41 . A trapper walks a 5.0-km straight-line distance from
the smallest values of the magnitude of the

90 2 • Chapter Review
her cabin to the lake, as shown in the following calculate (a) and its magnitude and
figure. Determine the east and north components of
direction angle, and (b) and its magnitude
her displacement vector. How many more
and direction angle.
kilometers would she have to walk if she walked
along the component displacements? What is her 48 . A particle undergoes three consecutive
displacement vector? displacements given by vectors
,
, and
. (a) Find the
resultant displacement vector of the particle. (b)
What is the magnitude of the resultant
displacement? (c) If all displacements were
along one line, how far would the particle travel?
49 . Given two displacement vectors
and
, find the
displacements and their magnitudes for (a)
42 . The polar coordinates of a point are and
and (b) .
5.50 m. What are its Cartesian coordinates?
50 . A small plane flies in a direction
43 . Two points in a plane have polar coordinates
north of east and then flies in a
and .
direction north of east. Use the analytical
Determine their Cartesian coordinates and the
method to find the total distance the plane
distance between them in the Cartesian
covers from the starting point, and the
coordinate system. Round the distance to a
geographic direction of its displacement vector.
nearest centimeter.
What is its displacement vector?
44 . A chameleon is resting quietly on a lanai screen,
51 . In an attempt to escape a desert island, a
waiting for an insect to come by. Assume the
castaway builds a raft and sets out to sea. The
origin of a Cartesian coordinate system at the
wind shifts a great deal during the day, and she
lower left-hand corner of the screen and the
is blown along the following straight lines: 2.50
horizontal direction to the right as the
km and north of west, then 4.70 km and
+x-direction. If its coordinates are (2.000 m,
south of east, then 1.30 km and
1.000 m), (a) how far is it from the corner of the
south of west, then 5.10 km due east, then 1.70
screen? (b) What is its location in polar
km and east of north, then 7.20 km and
coordinates?
south of west, and finally 2.80 km and
45 . Two points in the Cartesian plane are A(2.00 m, north of east. Use the analytical method to
−4.00 m) and B(−3.00 m, 3.00 m). Find the find the resultant vector of all her displacement
distance between them and their polar vectors. What is its magnitude and direction?
coordinates.
52 . Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for
46 . A fly enters through an open window and zooms the vectors given in the following figure, use the
around the room. In a Cartesian coordinate analytical method to find the following resultants:
system with three axes along three edges of the
(a) , (b) , (c) , (d) , (e) ,
room, the fly changes its position from point
(f) , (g) , and (h) .
b(4.0 m, 1.5 m, 2.5 m) to point e(1.0 m, 4.5 m,
0.5 m). Find the scalar components of the fly’s
displacement vector and express its
displacement vector in vector component form.
What is its magnitude?
2.3 Algebra of Vectors
47 . For vectors and ,
Access for free at openstax.org