# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 261-268
############################################################

Chapter 6 | Gauss's Law 251
6.3 Check Your Understanding Calculate the electric flux through the closed cubical surface for each
charge distribution shown inFigure 6.20.
Figure 6.20 A cubical Gaussian surface with various charge distributions.
Usethissimulation (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21gaussimulat) toadjustthemagnitudeofthecharge
andtheradiusoftheGaussiansurfacearoundit.Seehowthisaffectsthetotalfluxandthemagnitudeoftheelectric
field at the Gaussian surface.
6.3 | Applying Gauss’s Law
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what spherical, cylindrical, and planar symmetry are
• Recognize whether or not a given system possesses one of these symmetries
• Apply Gauss’s law to determine the electric field of a system with one of these symmetries
Gauss’slawisveryhelpfulindeterminingexpressionsfortheelectricfield,eventhoughthelawisnotdirectlyaboutthe
electricfield;itisabouttheelectricflux.Itturnsoutthatinsituationsthathavecertainsymmetries(spherical,cylindrical,
or planar) in the charge distribution, we can deduce the electric field based on knowledge of the electric flux. In these

252 Chapter 6 | Gauss's Law
→
systems, we can find a Gaussian surface S over which the electric field has constant magnitude. Furthermore, if E is
parallelto ^ n everywhereonthesurface,then → E · ^ n =E. (If → E and ^ n areantiparalleleverywhereonthesurface,
then → E · ^ n =−E.) Gauss’s law then simplifies to
Φ=∮ → E · ^ n dA=E∮ dA=EA= q ε enc, (6.6)
S S 0
whereAistheareaofthesurface.Notethatthesesymmetriesleadtothetransformationofthefluxintegralintoaproduct
ofthemagnitudeoftheelectricfieldandanappropriatearea.WhenyouusethisfluxintheexpressionforGauss’slaw,you
obtain an algebraic equation that you can solve for the magnitude of the electric field, which looks like
q
E~ε e
a
n
r
c
ea
.
0
ThedirectionoftheelectricfieldatthefieldpointPisobtainedfromthesymmetryofthechargedistributionandthetype
→
ofchargeinthedistribution.Therefore,Gauss’slawcanbeusedtodetermine E . Hereisasummaryofthestepswewill
follow:
Problem-Solving Strategy: Gauss’s Law
1. Identifythespatialsymmetryofthechargedistribution.Thisisanimportantfirststepthatallowsustochoose
theappropriateGaussiansurface.Asexamples,anisolatedpointchargehassphericalsymmetry,andaninfinite
line of charge has cylindrical symmetry.
2. ChooseaGaussiansurfacewiththesamesymmetryasthechargedistributionandidentifyitsconsequences.
With this choice, → E · ^ n is easily determined over the Gaussian surface.
3. Evaluatetheintegral ∮ → E · ^ n dA overtheGaussiansurface,thatis,calculatethefluxthroughthesurface.
S
The symmetry of the Gaussian surface allows us to factor → E · ^ n outside the integral.
4. Determine the amount of charge enclosed by the Gaussian surface. This is an evaluation of the right-hand
sideoftheequationrepresentingGauss’slaw.Itisoftennecessarytoperformanintegrationtoobtainthenet
enclosed charge.
5. Evaluatetheelectricfieldofthechargedistribution.Thefieldmaynowbefoundusingtheresultsofsteps3
and 4.
Basically, there are only three types of symmetry that allow Gauss’s law to be used to deduce the electric field. They are
• A charge distribution with spherical symmetry
• A charge distribution with cylindrical symmetry
• A charge distribution with planar symmetry
Toexploitthesymmetry,weperformthecalculationsinappropriatecoordinatesystemsandusetherightkindofGaussian
surface for that symmetry, applying the remaining four steps.
Charge Distribution with Spherical Symmetry
Achargedistributionhassphericalsymmetryifthedensityofchargedependsonlyonthedistancefromapointinspace
and not on the direction. In other words, if you rotate the system, it doesn’t look different. For instance, if a sphere of
radiusRisuniformlychargedwithchargedensity ρ thenthedistributionhassphericalsymmetry(Figure 6.21(a)).On
0
theotherhand,ifasphereofradiusRischargedsothatthetophalfofthespherehasuniformchargedensity ρ andthe
1
bottomhalfhasauniformchargedensity ρ ≠ ρ , thenthespheredoesnothavesphericalsymmetrybecausethecharge
2 1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 6 | Gauss's Law 253
densitydependsonthedirection(Figure6.21(b)).Thus,itisnottheshapeoftheobjectbutrathertheshapeofthecharge
distribution that determines whether or not a system has spherical symmetry.
Figure 6.21(c) shows a sphere with four different shells, each with its own uniform charge density. Although this is a
situationwherechargedensityinthefullsphereisnotuniform,thechargedensityfunctiondependsonlyonthedistance
from the center and not on the direction. Therefore, this charge distribution does have spherical symmetry.
Figure 6.21 Illustrations of spherically symmetrical and nonsymmetrical systems. Different shadings indicate
different charge densities. Charges on spherically shaped objects do not necessarily mean the charges are
distributed with spherical symmetry. The spherical symmetry occurs only when the charge density does not
depend on the direction. In (a), charges are distributed uniformly in a sphere. In (b), the upper half of the sphere
has a different charge density from the lower half; therefore, (b) does not have spherical symmetry. In (c), the
charges are in spherical shells of different charge densities, which means that charge density is only a function
of the radial distance from the center; therefore, the system has spherical symmetry.
Onegoodwaytodeterminewhetherornotyourproblemhassphericalsymmetryistolookatthechargedensityfunction
insphericalcoordinates, ρ⎛r, θ, ϕ⎞.Ifthechargedensityisonlyafunctionofr,thatis ρ= ρ(r),thenyouhavespherical
⎝ ⎠
symmetry. If the density depends on θ or ϕ, you could change it by rotation; hence, you would not have spherical
symmetry.
Consequences of symmetry
Inallsphericallysymmetricalcases,theelectricfieldatanypointmustberadiallydirected,becausethechargeand,hence,
the field must be invariant under rotation. Therefore, using spherical coordinates with their origins at the center of the
sphericalchargedistribution,wecanwritedowntheexpectedformoftheelectricfieldatapointPlocatedatadistancer
from the center:
→ ^ (6.7)
Spherical symmetry: E P=E P(r)r,
where ^ r istheunitvectorpointedinthedirectionfromtheorigintothefieldpointP.Theradialcomponent E P ofthe
electric field can be positive or negative. When E P>0, the electric field at P points away from the origin, and when
E P<0, the electric field atPpoints toward the origin.
Gaussian surface and flux calculations
We can now use this form of the electric field to obtain the flux of the electric field through the Gaussian surface. For
sphericalsymmetry,theGaussiansurfaceisaclosedsphericalsurfacethathasthesamecenterasthecenterofthecharge
distribution.Thus,thedirectionoftheareavectorofanareaelementontheGaussiansurfaceatanypointisparalleltothe
direction of the electric field at that point, since they are both radially directed outward (Figure 6.22).

254 Chapter 6 | Gauss's Law
Figure 6.22 The electric field at any point of the spherical
Gaussian surface for a spherically symmetrical charge
distribution is parallel to the area element vector at that point,
giving flux as the product of the magnitude of electric field and
the value of the area. Note that the radiusRof the charge
distribution and the radiusrof the Gaussian surface are different
quantities.
→
Themagnitudeoftheelectricfield E mustbethesameeverywhereonasphericalGaussiansurfaceconcentricwiththe
distribution. For a spherical surface of radiusr,
Φ=∮ → E P· ^ n dA=E P ∮ dA=E P 4πr2.
S S
Using Gauss’s law
AccordingtoGauss’slaw,thefluxthroughaclosedsurfaceisequaltothetotalchargeenclosedwithintheclosedsurface
dividedbythepermittivityofvacuum ε .Let q bethetotalchargeenclosedinsidethedistancerfromtheorigin,which
0 enc
is the space inside the Gaussian spherical surface of radiusr. This gives the following relation for Gauss’s law:
q
4πr2E=
ε
enc.
0
Hence,theelectricfieldatpointPthatisadistancerfromthecenterofasphericallysymmetricalchargedistributionhas
the following magnitude and direction:
Magnitude:E(r)= 1 q enc (6.8)
4πε
0
r2
Direction: radial fromOtoPor fromPtoO.
ThedirectionofthefieldatpointPdependsonwhetherthechargeinthesphereispositiveornegative.Foranetpositive
charge enclosed within the Gaussian surface, the direction is from O to P, and for a net negative charge, the direction is
fromPtoO.Thisisallweneedforapointcharge,andyouwillnoticethattheresultaboveisidenticaltothatforapoint
charge. However, Gauss’s law becomes truly useful in cases where the charge occupies a finite volume.
Computing enclosed charge
The more interesting case is when a spherical charge distribution occupies a volume, and asking what the electric field
insidethechargedistribution isthusbecomes relevant. Inthiscase,thechargeenclosed dependsonthedistance rofthe
field point relative to the radius of the charge distributionR, such as that shown inFigure 6.23.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 6 | Gauss's Law 255
Figure 6.23 A spherically symmetrical charge distribution and the Gaussian surface used for finding the
field (a) inside and (b) outside the distribution.
If point P is located outside the charge distribution—that is, if r ≥R—then the Gaussian surface containing P encloses
all charges in the sphere. In this case, q equals the total charge in the sphere. On the other hand, if point P is within
enc
thesphericalchargedistribution,thatis,if r <R, thentheGaussiansurfaceenclosesasmallerspherethanthesphereof
chargedistribution.Inthiscase, q islessthanthetotalchargepresentinthesphere.ReferringtoFigure6.23,wecan
enc
write q as
enc
⎧q (total charge)ifr ≥R
q enc=
⎩
⎨
q
t
w
o
i
t
thinr<R(only charge withinr<R)ifr<R
.
→
Thefieldatapointoutsidethechargedistributionisalsocalled E ,andthefieldatapointinsidethechargedistribution
out
→
iscalled E . Focusingonthetwotypesoffieldpoints,eitherinsideoroutsidethechargedistribution,wecannowwrite
in
the magnitude of the electric field as
Poutside sphereE = 1 q tot (6.9)
out 4πε
0
r2
Pinside sphereE = 1 q withinr<R . (6.10)
in 4πε
0
r2
Notethattheelectricfieldoutsideasphericallysymmetricalchargedistributionisidenticaltothatofapointchargeatthe
centerthathasachargeequaltothetotalchargeofthesphericalchargedistribution.Thisisremarkablesincethecharges
arenotlocated atthecenter only.Wenowworkoutspecific examples ofspherical chargedistributions, starting withthe
case of a uniformly charged sphere.
Example 6.6
Uniformly Charged Sphere
A sphere of radius R, such as that shown in Figure 6.23, has a uniform volume charge density ρ . Find the
0
electric field at a point outside the sphere and at a point inside the sphere.
Strategy
Apply the Gauss’s law problem-solving strategy, where we have already worked out the flux calculation.
Solution
The charge enclosed by the Gaussian surface is given by

256 Chapter 6 | Gauss's Law
r
q enc=∫ρ
0
dV =∫ ρ
0
4πr′2dr′= ρ
0
⎛
⎝
4
3
πr3⎞
⎠
.
0
The answer for electric field amplitude can then be written down immediately for a point outside the sphere,
labeled E , and a point inside the sphere, labeled E .
out in
q
E = 1 tot, q = 4πR3 ρ ,
out 4πε
0
r2 tot 3 0
q ρ r
E
in
=
4πε
e
0
nc
r2
=
3ε
0
0
, sinceq enc= 4
3
πr3 ρ
0
.
Itisinterestingtonotethatthemagnitudeoftheelectricfieldincreasesinsidethematerialasyougoout,sincethe
amountofchargeenclosedbytheGaussiansurfaceincreaseswiththevolume.Specifically,thechargeenclosed
grows ∝r3,whereasthefieldfromeachinfinitesimalelementofchargedropsoff ∝1/r2 withthenetresult
thattheelectricfieldwithinthedistributionincreasesinstrengthlinearlywiththeradius.Themagnitudeofthe
electricfieldoutsidethespheredecreasesasyougoawayfromthecharges,becausetheincludedchargeremains
thesamebutthedistanceincreases.Figure6.24displaysthevariationofthemagnitudeoftheelectricfieldwith
distance from the center of a uniformly charged sphere.
Figure 6.24 Electric field of a uniformly charged, non-
conducting sphere increases inside the sphere to a maximum at
ρ R
the surface and then decreases as 1/r2. Here, E R=
3
0
ε
. The
0
electric field is due to a spherical charge distribution of uniform
charge density and total chargeQas a function of distance from
the center of the distribution.
ThedirectionoftheelectricfieldatanypointPisradiallyoutwardfromtheoriginif ρ ispositive,andinward
0
(i.e.,towardthecenter)if ρ isnegative.Theelectricfieldatsomerepresentativespacepointsaredisplayedin
0
Figure 6.25whose radial coordinatesrare r =R/2, r =R, and r =2R.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 6 | Gauss's Law 257
Figure 6.25 Electric field vectors inside and outside a uniformly charged
sphere.
Significance
Noticethat E hasthesameformastheequationoftheelectricfieldofanisolatedpointcharge.Indetermining
out
theelectricfieldofauniformsphericalchargedistribution,wecanthereforeassumethatallofthechargeinside
the appropriate spherical Gaussian surface is located at the center of the distribution.
Example 6.7
Non-Uniformly Charged Sphere
Anon-conductingsphereofradiusRhasanon-uniformchargedensitythatvarieswiththedistancefromitscenter
as given by
ρ(r)=arn (r ≤R;n≥0),
whereaisaconstant.Werequire n≥0 sothatthechargedensityisnotundefinedat r =0.Findtheelectric
field at a point outside the sphere and at a point inside the sphere.
Strategy
ApplytheGauss’slawstrategygivenabove,whereweworkouttheenclosedchargeintegralsseparatelyforcases
inside and outside the sphere.
Solution
Sincethegivenchargedensityfunctionhasonlyaradialdependenceandnodependenceondirection,wehavea
sphericallysymmetricalsituation.Therefore,themagnitudeoftheelectricfieldatanypointisgivenaboveand
thedirectionisradial.Wejustneedtofindtheenclosedcharge q enc, whichdependsonthelocationofthefield
point.