# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 355-361
############################################################

8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 343
Let’s look at a specific example, choosing zero potential energy for gravitational potential energy at convenient
points.
EXAMPLE 8.1
Basic Properties of Potential Energy
A particle moves along the x-axis under the action of a force given by , where . (a) What is the
difference in its potential energy as it moves from to ? (b) What is the particle’s potential energy
at with respect to a given 0.5 J of potential energy at ?
Strategy
(a) The difference in potential energy is the negative of the work done, as defined by Equation 8.1. The work is
defined in the previous chapter as the dot product of the force with the distance. Since the particle is moving
forward in the x-direction, the dot product simplifies to a multiplication ( ). To find the total work done, we
need to integrate the function between the given limits. After integration, we can state the work or the change in
potential energy. (b) The potential energy function, with respect to zero at , is the indefinite integral
encountered in part (a), with the constant of integration determined from Equation 8.3. Then, we substitute the
x-value into the function of potential energy to calculate the potential energy at
Solution
a. The work done by the given force as the particle moves from coordinate x to in one dimension is
Substituting this expression into Equation 8.1, we obtain
b. The indefinite integral for the potential energy function in part (a) is
and we want the constant to be determined by
Thus, the potential energy with respect to zero at is just
Therefore, the potential energy at is
Significance
In this one-dimensional example, any function we can integrate, independent of path, is conservative. Notice how
we applied the definition of potential energy difference to determine the potential energy function with respect to
zero at a chosen point. Also notice that the potential energy, as determined in part (b), at is
and at is ; their difference is the result in part (a).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.1
In Example 8.1, what are the potential energies of the particle at and with respect to zero at
? Verify that the difference of potential energy is still 7 J.

344 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Systems of Several Particles
In general, a system of interest could consist of several particles. The difference in the potential energy of the
system is the negative of the work done by gravitational or elastic forces, which, as we will see in the next section,
are conservative forces. The potential energy difference depends only on the initial and final positions of the
particles, and on some parameters that characterize the interaction (like mass for gravity or the spring constant for a
Hooke’s law force).
It is important to remember that potential energy is a property of the interactions between objects in a chosen
system, and not just a property of each object. This is especially true for electric forces, although in the examples of
potential energy we consider below, parts of the system are either so big (like Earth, compared to an object on its
surface) or so small (like a massless spring), that the changes those parts undergo are negligible when included in
the system.
Types of Potential Energy
For each type of interaction present in a system, you can label a corresponding type of potential energy. The total
potential energy of the system is the sum of the potential energies of all the types. (This follows from the additive
property of the dot product in the expression for the work done.) Let’s look at some specific examples of types of
potential energy discussed in Work. First, we consider each of these forces when acting separately, and then when
both act together.
Gravitational potential energy near Earth’s surface
The system of interest consists of our planet, Earth, and one or more particles near its surface (or bodies small
enough to be considered as particles, compared to Earth). The gravitational force on each particle (or body) is just
its weight mg near the surface of Earth, acting vertically down. According to Newton’s third law, each particle exerts
a force on Earth of equal magnitude but in the opposite direction. Newton’s second law tells us that the magnitude
of the acceleration produced by each of these forces on Earth is mg divided by Earth’s mass. Since the ratio of the
mass of any ordinary object to the mass of Earth is vanishingly small, the motion of Earth can be completely
neglected. Therefore, we consider this system to be a group of single-particle systems, subject to the uniform
gravitational force of Earth.
In Work, the work done on a body by Earth’s uniform gravitational force, near its surface, depended on the mass of
the body, the acceleration due to gravity, and the difference in height the body traversed, as given by Equation 7.4.
By definition, this work is the negative of the difference in the gravitational potential energy, so that difference is
8.4
You can see from this that the gravitational potential energy function, near Earth’s surface, is
8.5
You can choose the value of the constant, as described in the discussion of Equation 8.2; however, for solving most
problems, the most convenient constant to choose is zero for when which is the lowest vertical position in
the problem.
EXAMPLE 8.2
Gravitational Potential Energy of a Hiker
The summit of Great Blue Hill in Milton, MA, is 147 m above its base and has an elevation above sea level of 195 m
(Figure 8.3). (Its Native American name, Massachusett, was adopted by settlers for naming the Bay Colony and state
near its location.) A 75-kg hiker ascends from the base to the summit. What is the gravitational potential energy of
the hiker-Earth system with respect to zero gravitational potential energy at base height, when the hiker is (a) at the
base of the hill, (b) at the summit, and (c) at sea level, afterward?
Access for free at openstax.org

8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 345
FIGURE 8.3 Sketch of the profile of Great Blue Hill, Milton, MA. The altitudes of the three levels are indicated.
Strategy
First, we need to pick an origin for the y-axis and then determine the value of the constant that makes the potential
energy zero at the height of the base. Then, we can determine the potential energies from Equation 8.5, based on
the relationship between the zero potential energy height and the height at which the hiker is located.
Solution
a. Let’s choose the origin for the y-axis at base height, where we also want the zero of potential energy to be.
This choice makes the constant equal to zero and
b. At the summit, , so
c. At sea level, , so
Significance
Besides illustrating the use of Equation 8.4 and Equation 8.5, the values of gravitational potential energy we found
are reasonable. The gravitational potential energy is higher at the summit than at the base, and lower at sea level
than at the base. Gravity does work on you on your way up, too! It does negative work and not quite as much (in
magnitude), as your muscles do. But it certainly does work. Similarly, your muscles do work on your way down, as
negative work. The numerical values of the potential energies depend on the choice of zero of potential energy, but
the physically meaningful differences of potential energy do not. [Note that since Equation 8.2 is a difference, the
numerical values do not depend on the origin of coordinates.]
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.2
What are the values of the gravitational potential energy of the hiker at the base, summit, and sea level, with respect
to a sea-level zero of potential energy?
Elastic potential energy
In Work, we saw that the work done by a perfectly elastic spring, in one dimension, depends only on the spring
constant and the squares of the displacements from the unstretched position, as given in Equation 7.5. This work
involves only the properties of a Hooke’s law interaction and not the properties of real springs and whatever objects
are attached to them. Therefore, we can define the difference of elastic potential energy for a spring force as the
negative of the work done by the spring force in this equation, before we consider systems that embody this type of
force. Thus,
8.6
where the object travels from point A to point B. The potential energy function corresponding to this difference is
8.7

346 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
If the spring force is the only force acting, it is simplest to take the zero of potential energy at , when the spring
is at its unstretched length. Then, the constant in Equation 8.7 is zero. (Other choices may be more convenient if
other forces are acting.)
EXAMPLE 8.3
Spring Potential Energy
A system contains a perfectly elastic spring, with an unstretched length of 20 cm and a spring constant of 4 N/cm.
(a) How much elastic potential energy does the spring contribute when its length is 23 cm? (b) How much more
potential energy does it contribute if its length increases to 26 cm?
Strategy
When the spring is at its unstretched length, it contributes nothing to the potential energy of the system, so we can
use Equation 8.7 with the constant equal to zero. The value of x is the length minus the unstretched length. When
the spring is expanded, the spring’s displacement or difference between its relaxed length and stretched length
should be used for the x-value in calculating the potential energy of the spring.
Solution
a. The displacement of the spring is , so the contributed potential energy is
.
b. When the spring’s displacement is , the potential energy is
, which is a 0.54-J increase over the amount in part (a).
Significance
Calculating the elastic potential energy and potential energy differences from Equation 8.7 involves solving for the
potential energies based on the given lengths of the spring. Since U depends on , the potential energy for a
compression (negative x) is the same as for an extension of equal magnitude.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.3
When the length of the spring in Example 8.3 changes from an initial value of 22.0 cm to a final value, the elastic
potential energy it contributes changes by Find the final length.
Gravitational and elastic potential energy
A simple system embodying both gravitational and elastic types of potential energy is a one-dimensional, vertical
mass-spring system. This consists of a massive particle (or block), hung from one end of a perfectly elastic,
massless spring, the other end of which is fixed, as illustrated in Figure 8.4.
Access for free at openstax.org

8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 347
FIGURE 8.4 A vertical mass-spring system, with the positive y-axis pointing upward. The mass is initially at an unstretched spring length,
point A. Then it is released, expanding past point B to point C, where it comes to a stop.
First, let's consider the potential energy of the system. We need to define the constant in the potential energy
function of Equation 8.5. Often, the ground is a suitable choice for when the gravitational potential energy is zero;
however, in this case, the highest point or when is a convenient location for zero gravitational potential energy.
Note that this choice is arbitrary, and the problem can be solved correctly even if another choice is picked.
We must also define the elastic potential energy of the system and the corresponding constant, as detailed in
Equation 8.7. This is where the spring is unstretched, or at the position.
If we consider that the total energy of the system is conserved, then the energy at point A equals point C. The block
is placed just on the spring so its initial kinetic energy is zero. By the setup of the problem discussed previously, both
the gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy are equal to zero. Therefore, the initial energy of the
system is zero. When the block arrives at point C, its kinetic energy is zero. However, it now has both gravitational
potential energy and elastic potential energy. Therefore, we can solve for the distance y that the block travels before
coming to a stop:

348 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
FIGURE 8.5 A bungee jumper transforms gravitational potential energy at the start of the jump into elastic potential energy at the bottom of
the jump.
EXAMPLE 8.4
Potential Energy of a Vertical Mass-Spring System
A block weighing is hung from a spring with a spring constant of , as shown in Figure 8.4. (a) What is
the maximum expansion of the spring, as seen at point C? (b) What is the total potential energy at point B, halfway
between A and C? (c) What is the speed of the block at point B?
Strategy
In part (a) we calculate the distance as discussed in the previous text. Then in part (b), we use half of the y value
to calculate the potential energy at point B using equations Equation 8.4 and Equation 8.6. This energy must be
equal to the kinetic energy, Equation 7.6, at point B since the initial energy of the system is zero. By calculating the
kinetic energy at point B, we can now calculate the speed of the block at point B.
Solution
a. Since the total energy of the system is zero at point A as discussed previously, the maximum expansion of the
spring is calculated to be:
b. The position of is half of the position at or . The total potential energy at point B
would therefore be:
c. The mass of the block is the weight divided by gravity.
Access for free at openstax.org