# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 697-704
############################################################

14.6 • Bernoulli’s Equation 685
fluid, the depth increases by , and consequently, is greater than by an amount . In the very simplest
case, is zero at the top of the fluid, and we get the familiar relationship . and
Thus, Bernoulli’s equation confirms the fact that the pressure change due to the weight of a fluid is
. Although we introduce Bernoulli’s equation for fluid motion, it includes much of what we studied for static
fluids earlier.
Bernoulli’s principle
Suppose a fluid is moving but its depth is constant—that is, . Under this condition, Bernoulli’s equation
becomes
Situations in which fluid flows at a constant depth are so common that this equation is often also called Bernoulli’s
principle, which is simply Bernoulli’s equation for fluids at constant depth. (Note again that this applies to a small
volume of fluid as we follow it along its path.) Bernoulli’s principle reinforces the fact that pressure drops as speed
increases in a moving fluid: If is greater than in the equation, then must be less than for the equality to
hold.
EXAMPLE 14.6
Calculating Pressure
In Example 14.5, we found that the speed of water in a hose increased from 1.96 m/s to 25.5 m/s going from the
hose to the nozzle. Calculate the pressure in the hose, given that the absolute pressure in the nozzle is
(atmospheric, as it must be) and assuming level, frictionless flow.
Strategy
Level flow means constant depth, so Bernoulli’s principle applies. We use the subscript 1 for values in the hose and
2 for those in the nozzle. We are thus asked to find .
Solution
Solving Bernoulli’s principle for yields
Substituting known values,
Significance
This absolute pressure in the hose is greater than in the nozzle, as expected, since v is greater in the nozzle. The
pressure in the nozzle must be atmospheric, because the water emerges into the atmosphere without other
changes in conditions.
Applications of Bernoulli’s Principle
Many devices and situations occur in which fluid flows at a constant height and thus can be analyzed with Bernoulli’s
principle.
Entrainment
People have long put the Bernoulli principle to work by using reduced pressure in high-velocity fluids to move things
about. With a higher pressure on the outside, the high-velocity fluid forces other fluids into the stream. This process
is called entrainment. Entrainment devices have been in use since ancient times as pumps to raise water to small
heights, as is necessary for draining swamps, fields, or other low-lying areas. Some other devices that use the
concept of entrainment are shown in Figure 14.31.

686 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.31 Entrainment devices use increased fluid speed to create low pressures, which then entrain one fluid into another. (a) A
Bunsen burner uses an adjustable gas nozzle, entraining air for proper combustion. (b) An atomizer uses a squeeze bulb to create a jet of air
that entrains drops of perfume. Paint sprayers and carburetors use very similar techniques to move their respective liquids. (c) A common
aspirator uses a high-speed stream of water to create a region of lower pressure. Aspirators may be used as suction pumps in dental and
surgical situations or for draining a flooded basement or producing a reduced pressure in a vessel. (d) The chimney of a water heater is
designed to entrain air into the pipe leading through the ceiling.
Velocity measurement
Figure 14.32 shows two devices that apply Bernoulli’s principle to measure fluid velocity. The manometer in part (a)
is connected to two tubes that are small enough not to appreciably disturb the flow. The tube facing the oncoming
fluid creates a dead spot having zero velocity ( ) in front of it, while fluid passing the other tube has velocity
. This means that Bernoulli’s principle as stated in
becomes
Thus pressure over the second opening is reduced by , so the fluid in the manometer rises by h on the side
connected to the second opening, where
(Recall that the symbol means “proportional to.”) Solving for , we see that
Part (b) shows a version of this device that is in common use for measuring various fluid velocities; such devices are
frequently used as air-speed indicators in aircraft.
FIGURE 14.32 Measurement of fluid speed based on Bernoulli’s principle. (a) A manometer is connected to two tubes that are close
Access for free at openstax.org

14.6 • Bernoulli’s Equation 687
together and small enough not to disturb the flow. Tube 1 is open at the end facing the flow. A dead spot having zero speed is created there.
Tube 2 has an opening on the side, so the fluid has a speed v across the opening; thus, pressure there drops. The difference in pressure at
the manometer is , so h is proportional to (b) This type of velocity measuring device is a Prandtl tube, also known as a pitot
tube.
A fire hose
All preceding applications of Bernoulli’s equation involved simplifying conditions, such as constant height or
constant pressure. The next example is a more general application of Bernoulli’s equation in which pressure,
velocity, and height all change.
EXAMPLE 14.7
Calculating Pressure: A Fire Hose Nozzle
Fire hoses used in major structural fires have an inside diameter of 6.40 cm (Figure 14.33). Suppose such a hose
carries a flow of 40.0 L/s, starting at a gauge pressure of . The hose rises up 10.0 m along a ladder
to a nozzle having an inside diameter of 3.00 cm. What is the pressure in the nozzle?
FIGURE 14.33 Pressure in the nozzle of this fire hose is less than at ground level for two reasons: The water has to go uphill to get to the
nozzle, and speed increases in the nozzle. In spite of its lowered pressure, the water can exert a large force on anything it strikes by virtue
of its kinetic energy. Pressure in the water stream becomes equal to atmospheric pressure once it emerges into the air.
Strategy
We must use Bernoulli’s equation to solve for the pressure, since depth is not constant.
Solution
Bernoulli’s equation is
where subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the initial conditions at ground level and the final conditions inside the nozzle,
respectively. We must first find the speeds and . Since , we get
Similarly, we find
This rather large speed is helpful in reaching the fire. Now, taking to be zero, we solve Bernoulli’s equation for :
Substituting known values yields

688 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Significance
This value is a gauge pressure, since the initial pressure was given as a gauge pressure. Thus, the nozzle pressure
equals atmospheric pressure because the water exits into the atmosphere without changes in its conditions.
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what viscosity is
• Calculate flow and resistance with Poiseuille's law
• Explain how pressure drops due to resistance
• Calculate the Reynolds number for an object moving through a fluid
• Use the Reynolds number for a system to determine whether it is laminar or turbulent
• Describe the conditions under which an object has a terminal speed
In Applications of Newton’s Laws, which introduced the concept of friction, we saw that an object sliding across the
floor with an initial velocity and no applied force comes to rest due to the force of friction. Friction depends on the
types of materials in contact and is proportional to the normal force. We also discussed drag and air resistance in
that same chapter. We explained that at low speeds, the drag is proportional to the velocity, whereas at high speeds,
drag is proportional to the velocity squared. In this section, we introduce the forces of friction that act on fluids in
motion. For example, a fluid flowing through a pipe is subject to resistance, a type of friction, between the fluid and
the walls. Friction also occurs between the different layers of fluid. These resistive forces affect the way the fluid
flows through the pipe.
Viscosity and Laminar Flow
When you pour yourself a glass of juice, the liquid flows freely and quickly. But if you pour maple syrup on your
pancakes, that liquid flows slowly and sticks to the pitcher. The difference is fluid friction, both within the fluid itself
and between the fluid and its surroundings. We call this property of fluids viscosity. Juice has low viscosity, whereas
syrup has high viscosity.
The precise definition of viscosity is based on laminar, or nonturbulent, flow. Figure 14.34 shows schematically how
laminar and turbulent flow differ. When flow is laminar, layers flow without mixing. When flow is turbulent, the layers
mix, and significant velocities occur in directions other than the overall direction of flow.
FIGURE 14.34 (a) Laminar flow occurs in layers without mixing. Notice that viscosity causes drag between layers as well as with the fixed
surface. The speed near the bottom of the flow ( ) is less than speed near the top ( ) because in this case, the surface of the containing
vessel is at the bottom. (b) An obstruction in the vessel causes turbulent flow. Turbulent flow mixes the fluid. There is more interaction,
greater heating, and more resistance than in laminar flow.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 689
Turbulence is a fluid flow in which layers mix together via eddies and swirls. It has two main causes. First, any
obstruction or sharp corner, such as in a faucet, creates turbulence by imparting velocities perpendicular to the flow.
Second, high speeds cause turbulence. The drag between adjacent layers of fluid and between the fluid and its
surroundings can form swirls and eddies if the speed is great enough. In Figure 14.35, the speed of the accelerating
smoke reaches the point that it begins to swirl due to the drag between the smoke and the surrounding air.
FIGURE 14.35 Smoke rises smoothly for a while and then begins to form swirls and eddies. The smooth flow is called laminar flow,
whereas the swirls and eddies typify turbulent flow. Smoke rises more rapidly when flowing smoothly than after it becomes turbulent,
suggesting that turbulence poses more resistance to flow. (credit: “Creativity103”/Flickr)
Figure 14.36 shows how viscosity is measured for a fluid. The fluid to be measured is placed between two parallel
plates. The bottom plate is held fixed, while the top plate is moved to the right, dragging fluid with it. The layer (or
lamina) of fluid in contact with either plate does not move relative to the plate, so the top layer moves at speed v
while the bottom layer remains at rest. Each successive layer from the top down exerts a force on the one below it,
trying to drag it along, producing a continuous variation in speed from v to 0 as shown. Care is taken to ensure that
the flow is laminar, that is, the layers do not mix. The motion in the figure is like a continuous shearing motion. Fluids
have zero shear strength, but the rate at which they are sheared is related to the same geometrical factors A and L
as is shear deformation for solids. In the diagram, the fluid is initially at rest. The layer of fluid in contact with the
moving plate is accelerated and starts to move due to the internal friction between moving plate and the fluid. The
next layer is in contact with the moving layer; since there is internal friction between the two layers, it also
accelerates, and so on through the depth of the fluid. There is also internal friction between the stationary plate and
the lowest layer of fluid, next to the station plate. The force is required to keep the plate moving at a constant
velocity due to the internal friction.
FIGURE 14.36 Measurement of viscosity for laminar flow of fluid between two plates of area A. The bottom plate is fixed. When the top
plate is pushed to the right, it drags the fluid along with it.
A force F is required to keep the top plate in Figure 14.36 moving at a constant velocity v, and experiments have
shown that this force depends on four factors. First, F is directly proportional to v (until the speed is so high that
turbulence occurs—then a much larger force is needed, and it has a more complicated dependence on v). Second, F
is proportional to the area A of the plate. This relationship seems reasonable, since A is directly proportional to the
amount of fluid being moved. Third, F is inversely proportional to the distance between the plates L. This

690 14 • Fluid Mechanics
relationship is also reasonable; L is like a lever arm, and the greater the lever arm, the less the force that is needed.
Fourth, F is directly proportional to the coefficient of viscosity, . The greater the viscosity, the greater the force
required. These dependencies are combined into the equation
This equation gives us a working definition of fluid viscosity . Solving for gives
14.17
which defines viscosity in terms of how it is measured.
The SI unit of viscosity is . Table 14.4 lists the coefficients of viscosity for
various fluids. Viscosity varies from one fluid to another by several orders of magnitude. As you might expect, the
viscosities of gases are much less than those of liquids, and these viscosities often depend on temperature.
Fluid Temperature Viscosity
Pa ⋅ s
Air 0 0.0171
20 0.0181
40 0.0190
100 0.0218
Ammonia 20 0.00974
Carbon dioxide 20 0.0147
Helium 20 0.0196
Hydrogen 0 0.0090
Mercury 20 0.0450
Oxygen 20 0.0203
Steam 100 0.0130
Liquid water 0 1.792
20 1.002
37 0.6947
40 0.653
100 0.282
TABLE 14.4 Coefficients of Viscosity of Various Fluids
Access for free at openstax.org

14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 691
Fluid Temperature Viscosity
Pa ⋅ s
Whole blood 20 3.015
37 2.084
Blood plasma 20 1.810
37 1.257
Ethyl alcohol 20 1.20
Methanol 20 0.584
Oil (heavy machine) 20 660
Oil (motor, SAE 10) 30 200
Oil (olive) 20 138
Glycerin 20 1500
Honey 20 2000–10000
Maple syrup 20 2000–3000
Milk 20 3.0
Oil (corn) 20 65
TABLE 14.4 Coefficients of Viscosity of Various Fluids
Laminar Flow Confined to Tubes: Poiseuille’s Law
What causes flow? The answer, not surprisingly, is a pressure difference. In fact, there is a very simple relationship
between horizontal flow and pressure. Flow rate Q is in the direction from high to low pressure. The greater the
pressure differential between two points, the greater the flow rate. This relationship can be stated as
where and are the pressures at two points, such as at either end of a tube, and R is the resistance to flow. The
resistance R includes everything, except pressure, that affects flow rate. For example, R is greater for a long tube
than for a short one. The greater the viscosity of a fluid, the greater the value of R. Turbulence greatly increases R,
whereas increasing the diameter of a tube decreases R.
If viscosity is zero, the fluid is frictionless and the resistance to flow is also zero. Comparing frictionless flow in a
tube to viscous flow, as in Figure 14.37, we see that for a viscous fluid, speed is greatest at midstream because of
drag at the boundaries. We can see the effect of viscosity in a Bunsen burner flame [part (c)], even though the
viscosity of natural gas is small.