# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 294-300
############################################################

286 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
Figure 6.23 Young’s double-slit experiment explains the
interference of light by making an analogy with the interference
of water waves. Two waves are generated at the positions of two
slits in an opaque screen. The waves have the same wavelengths.
They travel from their origins at the slits to the viewing screen
placed to the right of the slits. The waves meet on the viewing
screen. At the positions marked “Max” on the screen, the
meeting waves are in-phase and the combined wave amplitude is
enhanced. At positions marked “Min,” the combined wave
amplitude is zero. For light, this mechanism creates a bright-
and-dark fringe pattern on the viewing screen.
A similar dichotomy existed in the interpretation of electricity. From Benjamin Franklin’s observations of electricity in
1751 until J.J. Thomson’s discovery of the electron in 1897, electric current was seen as a flow in a continuous electric
medium. Within this theory of electric fluid, the present theory of electric circuits was developed, and electromagnetism
andelectromagneticinductionwerediscovered.Thomson’sexperimentshowedthattheunitofnegativeelectriccharge(an
electron) can travel in a vacuum without any medium to carry the charge around, as in electric circuits. This discovery
changedthewayinwhichelectricityisunderstoodtodayandgavetheelectronitsparticlestatus.InBohr’searlyquantum
theoryofthehydrogenatom,boththeelectronandtheprotonareparticlesofmatter.Likewise,intheComptonscatteringof
X-raysonelectrons,theelectronisaparticle.Ontheotherhand,inelectron-scatteringexperimentsoncrystallinestructures,
the electron behaves as a wave.
Askepticmayraiseaquestionthatperhapsanelectronmightalwaysbenothingmorethanaparticle,andthatthediffraction
imagesobtainedinelectron-scatteringexperimentsmightbeexplainedwithinsomemacroscopicmodelofacrystalanda
macroscopicmodelofelectronscomingatitlikearainofping-pongballs.Asamatteroffact,toinvestigatethisquestion,
wedonotneedacomplexmodelofacrystalbutjustacoupleofsimpleslitsinascreenthatisopaquetoelectrons.Inother
words,togatherconvincingevidenceaboutthenatureofanelectron,weneedtorepeattheYoungdouble-slitexperiment
withelectrons.Iftheelectronisawave,weshouldobservetheformationofinterferencepatternstypicalforwaves,suchas
thosedescribedinFigure6.23,evenwhenelectronscomethroughtheslitsonebyone.However,iftheelectronisanota
wave but a particle, the interference fringes will not be formed.
The very first double-slit experiment with a beam of electrons, performed by Claus Jönsson in Germany in 1961,
demonstratedthatabeamofelectronsindeedformsaninterferencepattern,whichmeansthatelectronscollectivelybehave
asawave.Thefirstdouble-slitexperimentswithsingleelectronspassingthroughtheslitsone-by-onewereperformedby
Giulio Pozzi in 1974 in Italy and by Akira Tonomura in 1989 in Japan. They show that interference fringes are formed
gradually,evenwhenelectronspassthroughtheslitsindividually.Thisdemonstratesconclusivelythatelectron-diffraction
imagesareformedbecauseofthewavenatureofelectrons.Theresultsseenindouble-slitexperimentswithelectronsare
illustrated by the images of the interference pattern inFigure 6.24.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 287
Figure 6.24 Computer-simulated interference fringes seen in the Young double-slit experiment with electrons. One pattern is
gradually formed on the screen, regardless of whether the electrons come through the slits as a beam or individually one-by-one.
Example 6.15
Double-Slit Experiment with Electrons
In one experimental setup for studying interference patterns of electron waves, two slits are created in a gold-
coatedsiliconmembrane.Eachslitis62-nmwideand 4-µm long,andtheseparationbetweentheslitsis272nm.
Theelectronbeamiscreatedinanelectrongunbyheatingatungstenelementandbyacceleratingtheelectrons
acrossa600-Vpotential.Thebeamissubsequentlycollimatedusingelectromagneticlenses,andthecollimated
beamofelectronsissentthroughtheslits.Findtheangularpositionofthefirst-orderbrightfringeontheviewing
screen.
Strategy
Recallthattheangularposition θ ofthenthorderbrightfringethatisformedinYoung’stwo-slitinterference
pattern(discussedinapreviouschapter)isrelatedtotheseparation,d,betweentheslitsandtothewavelength,
λ, oftheincidentlightbytheequation dsinθ=nλ, where n=0, ±1, ±2, .... Theseparationisgivenand
isequalto d =272nm. Forthefirst-orderfringe,wetake n=1. Theonlythingwenowneedisthewavelength
of the incident electron wave.
Sincetheelectronhasbeenacceleratedfromrestacrossapotentialdifferenceof ΔV =600V, itskineticenergy
is K =eΔV =600eV. The rest-mass energy of the electron is E =511keV.
0
WecomputeitsdeBrogliewavelengthasthatofanonrelativisticelectronbecauseitskineticenergy K ismuch
smaller than its rest energy E , K ≪E .
0 0
Solution
The electron’s wavelength is
λ= h p = h = h = hc = 1.241×10 −6 eV·m =0.050nm.
2m e K 2E 0 /c2K 2E 0 K 2(511keV)(600eV)
This λ is used to obtain the position of the first bright fringe:
sinθ= 1·λ = 0.050nm =0.000184⇒θ=0.010°.
d 272nm
Significance
Noticethatthisisalsotheangularresolutionbetweentwoconsecutivebrightfringesuptoabout n=1000. For
example,betweenthezero-orderfringeandthefirst-orderfringe,betweenthefirst-orderfringeandthesecond-
order fringe, and so on.
6.14 CheckYourUnderstandingForthesituationdescribedinExample6.15,findtheangularpositionof
the fifth-order bright fringe on the viewing screen.
Thewave-particledualnatureofmatterparticlesandofradiationisadeclarationofourinabilitytodescribephysicalreality
within one unified classical theory because separately neither a classical particle approach nor a classical wave approach
canfullyexplaintheobservedphenomena.Thislimitationoftheclassicalapproachwasrealizedbytheyear1928,anda
foundationforanewstatisticaltheory,calledquantummechanics,wasputinplacebyBohr,EdwinSchrödinger,Werner
Heisenberg,andPaulDirac.QuantummechanicstakesdeBroglie’sideaofmatterwavestobethefundamentalpropertyof
allparticlesandgivesitastatisticalinterpretation.Accordingtothisinterpretation,awavethatisassociatedwithaparticle

288 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
carriesinformationabouttheprobablepositionsoftheparticleandaboutitsotherproperties.Asingleparticleisseenasa
movingwavepacketsuchastheoneshowninFigure 6.25.Wecanintuitivelysensefromthisexamplethatifaparticle
isawavepacket,wewillnotbeabletomeasureitsexactpositioninthesamesenseaswecannotpinpointalocationof
a wave packet in a vibrating guitar string. The uncertainty, Δx, in measuring the particle’s position is connected to the
uncertainty, Δp, in the simultaneous measuring of its linear momentum by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle:
ΔxΔp≥ 1ℏ. (6.63)
2
Heisenberg’s principle expresses the law of nature that, at the quantum level, our perception is limited. For example, if
weknowtheexactpositionofabody(whichmeansthat Δx=0 inEquation 6.63)atthesametimewecannotknow
its momentum, because then the uncertainty in its momentum becomes infinite (because Δp≥0.5ℏ/Δx in Equation
6.63).TheHeisenberguncertaintyprinciplesetsthelimitontheprecisionofsimultaneousmeasurementsofpositionand
momentumofaparticle;itshowsthatthebestprecisionwecanobtainiswhenwehaveanequalssign( = )inEquation
6.63,andwecannotdobetterthanthat,evenwiththebestinstrumentsofthefuture.Heisenberg’sprincipleisaconsequence
of the wave nature of particles.
Figure 6.25 In this graphic, a particle is shown as a wave
packet and its position does not have an exact value.
Weroutinelyusemanyelectronicdevicesthatexploitwave-particledualitywithoutevenrealizingthesophisticationofthe
physicsunderlyingtheiroperation.Oneexampleofatechnologybasedontheparticlepropertiesofphotonsandelectrons
is a charge-coupled device, which is used for light detection in any instrumentation where high-quality digital data are
required,suchasindigitalcamerasorinmedicalsensors.Anexampleinwhichthewavepropertiesofelectronsisexploited
is an electron microscope.
In 1931, physicist Ernst Ruska—building on the idea that magnetic fields can direct an electron beam just as lenses can
directabeamoflightinanopticalmicroscope—developedthefirstprototypeoftheelectronmicroscope.Thisdevelopment
originated the field of electron microscopy. In the transmission electron microscope (TEM), shown in Figure 6.26,
electronsareproducedbyahottungstenelementandacceleratedbyapotentialdifferenceinanelectrongun,whichgives
them up to 400 keV in kinetic energy. After leaving the electron gun, the electron beam is focused by electromagnetic
lenses(asystemofcondensinglenses)andtransmittedthroughaspecimensampletobeviewed.Theimageofthesample
isreconstructedfromthetransmittedelectronbeam.Themagnifiedimagemaybeviewedeitherdirectlyonafluorescent
screenorindirectlybysendingit,forexample,toadigitalcameraoracomputermonitor.Theentiresetupconsistingofthe
electrongun,thelenses,thespecimen,andthefluorescentscreenareenclosedinavacuumchambertopreventtheenergy
lossfromthebeam.ResolutionoftheTEMislimitedonlybysphericalaberration(discussedinapreviouschapter).Modern
high-resolutionmodelsofaTEMcanhaveresolvingpowergreaterthan0.5Åandmagnificationshigherthan50million
times.Forcomparison,thebestresolvingpowerobtainedwithlightmicroscopyiscurrentlyabout97nm.Alimitationof
the TEM is that the samples must be about 100-nm thick and biological samples require a special preparation involving
chemical “fixing” to stabilize them for ultrathin slicing.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 289
Figure 6.26 TEM: An electron beam produced by an electron gun is collimated by condenser
lenses and passes through a specimen. The transmitted electrons are projected on a screen and
the image is sent to a camera. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Graham Beards)
Suchlimitationsdonotappearinthescanningelectronmicroscope(SEM),whichwasinventedbyManfredvonArdenne
in1937.InanSEM,atypicalenergyoftheelectronbeamisupto40keVandthebeamisnottransmittedthroughasample
but is scattered off its surface. Surface topography of the sample is reconstructed by analyzing back-scattered electrons,
transmittedelectrons,andtheemittedradiationproducedbyelectronsinteractingwithatomsinthesample.Theresolving
powerofanSEMisbetterthan1nm,andthemagnificationcanbemorethan250timesbetterthanthatobtainedwithalight
microscope.ThesamplesscannedbyanSEMcanbeaslargeasseveralcentimetersbuttheymustbespeciallyprepared,
depending on electrical properties of the sample.
Highmagnifications oftheTEMandSEMallowustoseeindividualmolecules. HighresolvingpowersoftheTEMand
SEM allow us to see fine details, such as those shown in the SEM micrograph of pollen at the beginning of this chapter
(Figure 6.1).
Example 6.16
Resolving Power of an Electron Microscope
Ifa1.0-pmelectronbeamofaTEMpassesthrougha 2.0-µm circularopening,whatistheanglebetweenthe
two just-resolvable point sources for this microscope?
Solution
Wecandirectlyuseaformulafortheresolvingpower, Δθ, ofamicroscope(discussedinapreviouschapter)
when the wavelength of the incident radiation is λ=1.0pm and the diameter of the aperture is D=2.0µm:
Δθ=1.22 λ =1.22 1.0pm =6.10×10 −7 rad=3.50×10 −5 degree.
D 2.0µm
Significance
Notethatifweusedaconventionalmicroscopewitha400-nmlight,theresolvingpowerwouldbeonly 14°,
which means that all of the fine details in the image would be blurred.

290 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
6.15 Check Your Understanding Suppose that the diameter of the aperture in Example 6.16 is halved.
How does it affect the resolving power?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 291
CHAPTER 6 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
absorber any object that absorbs radiation
absorption spectrum wavelengths of absorbed radiation by atoms and molecules
Balmer formula describes the emission spectrum of a hydrogen atom in the visible-light range
Balmer series spectral lines corresponding to electron transitions to/from the n=2 state of the hydrogen atom,
described by the Balmer formula
blackbody perfect absorber/emitter
blackbody radiation radiation emitted by a blackbody
Bohr radius of hydrogen radius of the first Bohr’s orbit
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom first quantum model to explain emission spectra of hydrogen
Brackett series spectral lines corresponding to electron transitions to/from the n=4 state
Compton effect the change in wavelength when an X-ray is scattered by its interaction with some materials
Compton shift difference between the wavelengths of the incident X-ray and the scattered X-ray
Compton wavelength physical constant with the value λ c=2.43pm
cut-off frequency frequency of incident light below which the photoelectric effect does not occur
cut-off wavelength wavelength of incident light that corresponds to cut-off frequency
Davisson–Germer experiment historically first electron-diffraction experiment that revealed electron waves
de Broglie wave matter wave associated with any object that has mass and momentum
de Broglie’s hypothesis of matter waves particles of matter can behave like waves
double-slit interference experiment Young’s double-slit experiment, which shows the interference of waves
electron microscopy microscopy that uses electron waves to “see” fine details of nano-size objects
emission spectrum wavelengths of emitted radiation by atoms and molecules
emitter any object that emits radiation
energy of a photon quantum of radiant energy, depends only on a photon’s frequency
energy spectrum of hydrogen set of allowed discrete energies of an electron in a hydrogen atom
excited energy states of the H atom energy state other than the ground state
Fraunhofer lines dark absorption lines in the continuum solar emission spectrum
ground state energy of the hydrogen atom energy of an electron in the first Bohr orbit of the hydrogen atom
group velocity velocity of a wave, energy travels with the group velocity
Heisenberg uncertainty principle sets the limits on precision in simultaneous measurements of momentum and
position of a particle
Humphreys series spectral lines corresponding to electron transitions to/from the n=6 state
hydrogen-like atom ionized atom with one electron remaining and nucleus with charge +Ze
inelastic scattering scattering effect where kinetic energy is not conserved but the total energy is conserved
ionization energy energy needed to remove an electron from an atom
ionization limit of the hydrogen atom ionization energy needed to remove an electron from the first Bohr orbit
Lyman series spectral lines corresponding to electron transitions to/from the ground state