# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 144-149
############################################################

134 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
Molar heat capacity at constant pressure C p=C V+R
Ratio of molar heat capacities γ =C p/C
V
Condition for an ideal gas in a quasi-static adiabatic process pVγ = constant
SUMMARY
3.1Thermodynamic Systems
• Athermodynamicsystem,itsboundary,anditssurroundingsmustbedefinedwithalltherolesofthecomponents
fully explained before we can analyze a situation.
• Thermal equilibrium is reached with two objects if a third object is in thermal equilibrium with the other two
separately.
• Ageneralequationofstateforaclosedsystemhastheform f(p, V, T)=0, withanidealgasasanillustrative
example.
3.2Work, Heat, and Internal Energy
• Positive(negative)workisdonebyathermodynamicsystemwhenitexpands(contracts)underanexternalpressure.
• Heat is the energy transferred between two objects (or two parts of a system) because of a temperature difference.
• Internal energy of a thermodynamic system is its total mechanical energy.
3.3First Law of Thermodynamics
• Theinternalenergyofathermodynamicsystemisafunctionofstateandthusisuniqueforeveryequilibriumstate
of the system.
• Theincreaseintheinternalenergyofthethermodynamicsystemisgivenbytheheataddedtothesystemlessthe
work done by the system in any thermodynamics process.
3.4Thermodynamic Processes
• Thethermalbehaviorofasystemisdescribedintermsofthermodynamicvariables.Foranidealgas,thesevariables
are pressure, volume, temperature, and number of molecules or moles of the gas.
• For systems in thermodynamic equilibrium, the thermodynamic variables are related by an equation of state.
• A heat reservoir is so large that when it exchanges heat with other systems, its temperature does not change.
• A quasi-static process takes place so slowly that the system involved is always in thermodynamic equilibrium.
• Areversibleprocessisonethatcanbemadetoretraceitspathandboththetemperatureandpressureareuniform
throughout the system.
• There are several types of thermodynamic processes, including (a) isothermal, where the system’s temperature is
constant; (b) adiabatic, where no heat is exchanged by the system; (c) isobaric, where the system’s pressure is
constant; and (d) isochoric, where the system’s volume is constant.
• As a consequence of the first law of thermodymanics, here is a summary of the thermodymaic processes: (a)
isothermal: ΔE =0, Q=W; (b) adiabatic: Q=0, ΔE =−W; (c) isobaric: ΔE =Q−W; and (d)
int int int
isochoric: W =0, ΔE =Q.
int
3.5Heat Capacities of an Ideal Gas
• Foranidealgas,themolarcapacityatconstantpressure C
p
isgivenby C p=C V+R=dR/2+R,wheredis
the number of degrees of freedom of each molecule/entity in the system.
• A real gas has a specific heat close to but a little bit higher than that of the corresponding ideal gas with
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 135
C p≃C V+R.
3.6Adiabatic Processes for an Ideal Gas
• A quasi-static adiabatic expansion of an ideal gas produces a steeper pV curve than that of the corresponding
isotherm.
• A realistic expansion can be adiabatic but rarely quasi-static.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
the source of energy needed to do this work?
3.1Thermodynamic Systems
1. Consider these scenarios and state whether work is 10. Ifthepressureandvolumeofasystemaregiven,isthe
done by the system on the environment (SE) or by the temperature always uniquely determined?
environmentonthesystem(ES):(a)openingacarbonated
beverage; (b) filling a flat tire; (c) a sealed empty gas can 11. It is unlikely that a process can be isothermal unless
expands on a hot day, bowing out the walls. itisaveryslowprocess.Explainwhy.Isthesametruefor
isobaric and isochoric processes? Explain your answer.
3.2Work, Heat, and Internal Energy
2. Isitpossibletodeterminewhetherachangeininternal 3.5Heat Capacities of an Ideal Gas
energyiscausedbyheattransferred,byworkperformed,or 12. Howcananobjecttransferheatiftheobjectdoesnot
by a combination of the two? possess a discrete quantity of heat?
3. Whenaliquidisvaporized,itschangeininternalenergy 13. Most materials expand when heated. One notable
is not equal to the heat added. Why? exceptioniswaterbetween 0°C and 4°C, whichactually
decreases in volume with the increase in temperature.
4. Whydoesabicyclepumpfeelwarmasyouinflateyour Whichisgreaterforwaterinthistemperatureregion, C
p
tire?
or C ?
V
5. Isitpossibleforthetemperatureofasystemtoremain
constant when heat flows into or out of it? If so, give 14. Why are there two specific heats for gases C and
p
examples.
C , yet only one given for solid?
V
3.3First Law of Thermodynamics
3.6Adiabatic Processes for an Ideal Gas
6. Whatdoesthefirstlawofthermodynamicstellusabout
the energy of the universe? 15. Is it possible for γ to be smaller than unity?
7. Does adding heat to a system always increase its
16. Wouldyouexpect γ tobelargerforagasorasolid?
internal energy?
Explain.
8. Agreatdealofeffort,time,andmoneyhasbeenspent
17. There is no change in the internal energy of an ideal
in the quest for a so-called perpetual-motion machine,
gas undergoing an isothermal process since the internal
which is defined as a hypothetical machine that operates
energy depends only on the temperature. Is it therefore
orproducesusefulworkindefinitely and/orahypothetical
correcttosaythatanisothermalprocessisthesameasan
machine that produces more work or energy than it
adiabatic process for an ideal gas? Explain your answer.
consumes. Explain, in terms of the first law of
thermodynamics,whyorwhynotsuchamachineislikely
to be constructed. 18. Does a gas do any work when it expands
adiabatically?Ifso,whatisthesourceoftheenergyneeded
to do this work?
3.4Thermodynamic Processes
9. Whenagasexpandsisothermally,itdoeswork.Whatis

136 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
PROBLEMS
3.1Thermodynamic Systems
19. Agasfollows pV =bp+c
T
onanisothermalcurve,
where p is the pressure, V is the volume, b is a constant,
andcisafunctionoftemperature.Showthatatemperature
scale under an isochoric process can be established with
this gas and is identical to that of an ideal gas.
20. A mole of gas has isobaric expansion coefficient
dV/dT =R/p and isochoric pressure-temperature
coefficient dp/dT = p/T.Findtheequationofstateofthe 29. (a) Calculate the work done by the gas along the
closed path shown below. The curved section between R
gas.
andSissemicircular.(b)Iftheprocessiscarriedoutinthe
opposite direction, what is the work done by the gas?
21. Findtheequationofstateofasolidthathasanisobaric
expansion coefficientdV/dT =2cT−bp and an
isothermal pressure-volume coefficient dV/dp=−bT.
3.2Work, Heat, and Internal Energy
22. A gas at a pressure of 2.00 atm undergoes a quasi-
static isobaric expansion from 3.00 to 5.00 L. How much
work is done by the gas?
23. It takes 500 J of work to compress quasi-statically 30. An ideal gas expands quasi-statically to three times
0.50 mol of an ideal gas to one-fifth its original volume. its original volume. Which process requires more work
Calculate the temperature of the gas, assuming it remains from the gas, an isothermal process or an isobaric one?
constant during the compression. Determine the ratio of the work done in these processes.
24. It is found that, when a dilute gas expands quasi- 31. A dilute gas at a pressure of 2.0 atm and a volume
statically from 0.50 to 4.0 L, it does 250 J of work. of 4.0 L is taken through the following quasi-static steps:
Assumingthatthegastemperatureremainsconstantat300 (a) an isobaric expansion to a volume of 10.0 L, (b) an
K, how many moles of gas are present? isochoricchangetoapressureof0.50atm,(c)anisobaric
compression to a volume of 4.0 L, and (d) an isochoric
changetoapressureof2.0atm.ShowthesestepsonapV
25. Inaquasi-staticisobaricexpansion,500Jofworkare
diagramanddeterminefromyourgraphthenetworkdone
done by the gas. If the gas pressure is 0.80 atm, what is
by the gas.
thefractionalincreaseinthevolumeofthegas,assumingit
was originally at 20.0 L?
32. Whatistheaveragemechanicalenergyoftheatomsof
an ideal monatomic gas at 300 K?
26. When a gas undergoes a quasi-static isobaric change
involumefrom10.0to2.0L,15Jofworkfromanexternal
source are required. What is the pressure of the gas? 33. What is the internal energy of 6.00 mol of an ideal
monatomic gas at 200°C ?
27. Anidealgasexpandsquasi-staticallyandisothermally
from a state with pressure p and volume V to a state with 34. Calculatetheinternalenergyof15mgofheliumata
volume 4V. Show that the work done by the gas in the temperature of 0°C.
expansion is pV(ln 4).
35. Two monatomic ideal gases A and B are at the same
28. Asshownbelow,calculatetheworkdonebythegasin
temperature.If1.0gofgasAhasthesameinternalenergy
thequasi-staticprocessesrepresentedbythepaths(a)AB;
as0.10gofgasB,whatare(a)theratioofthenumberof
(b) ADB; (c) ACB; and (d) ADCB.
moles of each gas and (b) the ration of the atomic masses
of the two gases?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 137
36. The van der Waals coefficients for oxygen are from a state with pressure p and volume V to a state with
a=0.138J·m 3 /mol2 and b=3.18×10 −5 m 3 /mol. volume 4V. How much heat is added to the expanding gas?
Use these values to draw a van der Waals isotherm of
oxygenat100K.Onthesamegraph,drawisothermsofone 41. Asshownbelow,iftheheatabsorbedbythegasalong
mole of an ideal gas. AB is 400 J, determine the quantities of heat absorbed
along (a) ADB; (b) ACB; and (c) ADCB.
37. Findtheworkdoneinthequasi-staticprocessesshown
below. The states are given as (p, V) values for the points
inthepVplane:1(3atm,4L),2(3atm,6L),3(5atm,4
L),4(2atm,6L),5(4atm,2L),6(5atm,5L),and7(2
atm, 5 L).
42. DuringtheisobaricexpansionfromAtoBrepresented
below,130Jofheatareremovedfromthegas.Whatisthe
change in its internal energy?
43. (a) What is the change in internal energy for the
process represented by the closed path shown below? (b)
Howmuchheatisexchanged?(c)Ifthepathistraversedin
the opposite direction, how much heat is exchanged?
3.3First Law of Thermodynamics
44. When a gas expands along path AC shown below,
38. Whenadilutegasexpandsquasi-statically from0.50 it does 400 J of work and absorbs either 200 or 400 J of
to 4.0 L, it does 250 J of work. Assuming that the gas heat.(a)SupposeyouaretoldthatalongpathABC,thegas
temperature remains constant at 300 K, (a) what is the absorbseither200or400Jofheat.Whichofthesevalues
change in the internal energy of the gas? (b) How much is correct? (b) Give the correct answer from part (a), how
heat is absorbed by the gas in this process? muchworkisdonebythegasalongABC?(c)AlongCD,
theinternalenergyofthegasdecreasesby50J.Howmuch
39. In a quasi-static isobaric expansion, 500 J of work heat is exchanged by the gas along this path?
are done by the gas. The gas pressure is 0.80 atm and it
was originally at 20.0 L. If the internal energy of the gas
increasedby80Jintheexpansion,howmuchheatdoesthe
gas absorb?
40. Anidealgasexpandsquasi-staticallyandisothermally

138 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
48. An ideal monatomic gas at a pressure of
45. WhenagasexpandsalongAB(seebelow),itdoes500
Jofworkandabsorbs250Jofheat.Whenthegasexpands 2.0×10 5 N/m2 and a temperature of 300 K undergoes
alongAC,itdoes700Jofworkandabsorbs300Jofheat. a quasi-static isobaric expansion from
(a) How much heat does the gas exchange along BC? (b) 2.0×10 3 to4.0×10 3 cm 3 . (a) What is the work done
When the gas makes the transmission from C to A along
bythegas?(b)Whatisthetemperatureofthegasafterthe
CDA,800JofworkaredoneonitfromCtoD.Howmuch
expansion?(c)Howmanymolesofgasarethere?(d)What
heat does it exchange alongCDA?
isthechangeininternalenergyofthegas?(e)Howmuch
heat is added to the gas?
49. Consider the process for steam in a cylinder shown
below. Suppose the change in the internal energy in this
process is 30 kJ. Find the heat entering the system.
46. Adilutegasisstoredintheleftchamberofacontainer
whose walls are perfectly insulating (see below), and the
rightchamberisevacuated.Whenthepartitionisremoved,
thegasexpandsandfillstheentirecontainer.Calculatethe
workdonebythe gas.Doesthe internal energyofthe gas
change in this process?
50. Thestateof30molesofsteaminacylinderischanged
in a cyclic manner from a-b-c-a, where the pressure and
volume of the states are: a (30 atm, 20 L), b (50 atm, 20
L),andc(50atm,45L).Assumeeachchangetakesplace
along the line connecting the initial and final states in the
pV plane. (a) Display the cycle in the pV plane. (b) Find
the net work done by the steam in one cycle. (c) Find the
netamountofheatflowinthesteamoverthecourseofone
cycle.
51. A monatomic ideal gas undergoes a quasi-static
47. Ideal gases A and B are stored in the left and right
process that is described by the function
chambers of an insulated container, as shown below. The
p(V)= p +3(V−V ), where the starting state is
partition is removed and the gases mix. Is any work done 1 1
inthisprocess?IfthetemperaturesofAandBareinitially ⎛p , V ⎞ andthefinalstate ⎛p , V ⎞.Assumethesystem
⎝ 1 1⎠ ⎝ 2 2⎠
equal, what happens to their common temperature after
consists of n moles of the gas in a container that can
they are mixed?
exchangeheatwiththeenvironmentandwhosevolumecan
changefreely.(a)Evaluatetheworkdonebythegasduring
the change in the state. (b) Find the change in internal
energyofthegas.(c)Findtheheatinputtothegasduring
the change. (d) What are initial and final temperatures?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9