# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 367-373
############################################################

8.3 • Conservation of Energy 355
doing work, then mechanical energy is not conserved. The system must then be analyzed with non-
conservative work, Equation 8.12.
4. For every conservative force that does work, choose a reference point and determine the potential energy
function for the force. The reference points for the various potential energies do not have to be at the same
location.
5. If no non-conservative work is done, apply the principle of mechanical energy conservation by setting the sum
of the kinetic energies and potential energies equal at every point of interest.
EXAMPLE 8.7
Simple Pendulum
A particle of mass m is hung from the ceiling by a massless string of length 1.0 m, as shown in Figure 8.7. The
particle is released from rest, when the angle between the string and the downward vertical direction is What is
its speed when it reaches the lowest point of its arc?
FIGURE 8.7 A particle hung from a string constitutes a simple pendulum. It is shown when released from rest, along with some distances
used in analyzing the motion.
Strategy
Using our problem-solving strategy, the first step is to define that we are interested in the particle-Earth system.
Second, only the gravitational force is acting on the particle, which is conservative (step 3). We neglect air resistance
in the problem, and no work is done by the string tension, which is perpendicular to the arc of the motion. Therefore,
the mechanical energy of the system is conserved, as represented by Equation 8.13, . Because the
particle starts from rest, the increase in the kinetic energy is just the kinetic energy at the lowest point. This increase
in kinetic energy equals the decrease in the gravitational potential energy, which we can calculate from the
geometry. In step 4, we choose a reference point for zero gravitational potential energy to be at the lowest vertical
point the particle achieves, which is mid-swing. Lastly, in step 5, we set the sum of energies at the highest point
(initial) of the swing to the lowest point (final) of the swing to ultimately solve for the final speed.
Solution
We are neglecting non-conservative forces, so we write the energy conservation formula relating the particle at the
highest point (initial) and the lowest point in the swing (final) as
Since the particle is released from rest, the initial kinetic energy is zero. At the lowest point, we define the
gravitational potential energy to be zero. Therefore our conservation of energy formula reduces to
The vertical height of the particle is not given directly in the problem. This can be solved for by using trigonometry
and two givens: the length of the pendulum and the angle through which the particle is vertically pulled up. Looking

356 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
at the diagram, the vertical dashed line is the length of the pendulum string. The vertical height is labeled h. The
other partial length of the vertical string can be calculated with trigonometry. That piece is solved for by
Therefore, by looking at the two parts of the string, we can solve for the height h,
We substitute this height into the previous expression solved for speed to calculate our result:
Significance
We found the speed directly from the conservation of mechanical energy, without having to solve the differential
equation for the motion of a pendulum (see Oscillations). We can approach this problem in terms of bar graphs of
total energy. Initially, the particle has all potential energy, being at the highest point, and no kinetic energy. When
the particle crosses the lowest point at the bottom of the swing, the energy moves from the potential energy column
to the kinetic energy column. Therefore, we can imagine a progression of this transfer as the particle moves
between its highest point, lowest point of the swing, and back to the highest point (Figure 8.8). As the particle
travels from the lowest point in the swing to the highest point on the far right hand side of the diagram, the energy
bars go in reverse order from (c) to (b) to (a).
FIGURE 8.8 Bar graphs representing the total energy (E), potential energy (U), and kinetic energy (K) of the particle in different positions.
(a) The total energy of the system equals the potential energy and the kinetic energy is zero, which is found at the highest point the particle
reaches. (b) The particle is midway between the highest and lowest point, so the kinetic energy plus potential energy bar graphs equal the
total energy. (c) The particle is at the lowest point of the swing, so the kinetic energy bar graph is the highest and equal to the total energy
of the system.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.7
How high above the bottom of its arc is the particle in the simple pendulum above, when its speed is
EXAMPLE 8.8
Air Resistance on a Falling Object
A helicopter is hovering at an altitude of when a panel from its underside breaks loose and plummets to the
ground (Figure 8.9). The mass of the panel is and it hits the ground with a speed of . How much
mechanical energy was dissipated by air resistance during the panel’s descent?
Access for free at openstax.org

8.3 • Conservation of Energy 357
FIGURE 8.9 A helicopter loses a panel that falls until it reaches terminal velocity of 45 m/s. How much did air resistance contribute to the
dissipation of energy in this problem?
Strategy
Step 1: Here only one body is being investigated.
Step 2: Gravitational force is acting on the panel, as well as air resistance, which is stated in the problem.
Step 3: Gravitational force is conservative; however, the non-conservative force of air resistance does negative work
on the falling panel, so we can use the conservation of mechanical energy, in the form expressed by Equation 8.12,
to find the energy dissipated. This energy is the magnitude of the work:
Step 4: The initial kinetic energy, at is zero. We set the gravitational potential energy to zero at ground
level out of convenience.
Step 5: The non-conservative work is set equal to the energies to solve for the work dissipated by air resistance.
Solution
The mechanical energy dissipated by air resistance is the algebraic sum of the gain in the kinetic energy and loss in
potential energy. Therefore the calculation of this energy is
Significance
Most of the initial mechanical energy of the panel , 147 kJ, was lost to air resistance. Notice that we were able
to calculate the energy dissipated without knowing what the force of air resistance was, only that it was dissipative.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.8
You probably recall that, neglecting air resistance, if you throw a projectile straight up, the time it takes to reach its
maximum height equals the time it takes to fall from the maximum height back to the starting height. Suppose you

358 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
cannot neglect air resistance, as in Example 8.8. Is the time the projectile takes to go up (a) greater than, (b) less
than, or (c) equal to the time it takes to come back down? Explain.
In these examples, we were able to use conservation of energy to calculate the speed of a particle just at particular
points in its motion. But the method of analyzing particle motion, starting from energy conservation, is more
powerful than that. More advanced treatments of the theory of mechanics allow you to calculate the full time
dependence of a particle’s motion, for a given potential energy. In fact, it is often the case that a better model for
particle motion is provided by the form of its kinetic and potential energies, rather than an equation for force acting
on it. (This is especially true for the quantum mechanical description of particles like electrons or atoms.)
We can illustrate some of the simplest features of this energy-based approach by considering a particle in one-
dimensional motion, with potential energy U(x) and no non-conservative interactions present. Equation 8.12 and the
definition of velocity require
Separate the variables x and t and integrate, from an initial time to an arbitrary time, to get
8.14
If you can do the integral in Equation 8.14, then you can solve for x as a function of t.
EXAMPLE 8.9
Constant Acceleration
Use the potential energy for in Equation 8.14 to find the position x of a particle as a
function of time t.
Strategy
Since we know how the potential energy changes as a function of x, we can substitute for in Equation 8.14,
integrate, and then solve for x. This results in an expression of x as a function of time with constants of energy E,
mass m, and the initial position
Solution
Following the first two suggested steps in the above strategy,
Solving for the position, we obtain .
Significance
The position as a function of time, for this potential, represents one-dimensional motion with constant acceleration,
starting at rest from position This is not so surprising, since this is a potential energy for a
constant force, and
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.9
What potential energy can you substitute in Equation 8.13 that will result in motion with constant velocity of 2
Access for free at openstax.org

8.4 • Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability 359
m/s for a particle of mass 1 kg and mechanical energy 1 J?
We will look at another more physically appropriate example of the use of Equation 8.13 after we have explored
some further implications that can be drawn from the functional form of a particle’s potential energy.
Systems with Several Particles or Objects
Systems generally consist of more than one particle or object. However, the conservation of mechanical energy, in
one of the forms in Equation 8.12 or Equation 8.13, is a fundamental law of physics and applies to any system. You
just have to include the kinetic and potential energies of all the particles, and the work done by all the non-
conservative forces acting on them. Until you learn more about the dynamics of systems composed of many
particles, in Linear Momentum and Collisions, Fixed-Axis Rotation, and Angular Momentum, it is better to postpone
discussing the application of energy conservation to then.
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Create and interpret graphs of potential energy
• Explain the connection between stability and potential energy
Often, you can get a good deal of useful information about the dynamical behavior of a mechanical system just by
interpreting a graph of its potential energy as a function of position, called a potential energy diagram. This is most
easily accomplished for a one-dimensional system, whose potential energy can be plotted in one two-dimensional
graph—for example, U(x) versus x—on a piece of paper or a computer program. For systems whose motion is in more
than one dimension, the motion needs to be studied in three-dimensional space. We will simplify our procedure for
one-dimensional motion only.
First, let’s look at an object, freely falling vertically, near the surface of Earth, in the absence of air resistance. The
mechanical energy of the object is conserved, and the potential energy, with respect to zero at ground
level, is which is a straight line through the origin with slope . In the graph shown in Figure 8.10,
the x-axis is the height above the ground y and the y-axis is the object’s energy.
FIGURE 8.10 The potential energy graph for an object in vertical free fall, with various quantities indicated.
The line at energy E represents the constant mechanical energy of the object, whereas the kinetic and potential
energies, and are indicated at a particular height You can see how the total energy is divided between
kinetic and potential energy as the object’s height changes. Since kinetic energy can never be negative, there is a
maximum potential energy and a maximum height, which an object with the given total energy cannot exceed:
If we use the gravitational potential energy reference point of zero at we can rewrite the gravitational potential
energy U as mgy. Solving for y results in

360 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
We note in this expression that the quantity of the total energy divided by the weight (mg) is located at the
maximum height of the particle, or At the maximum height, the kinetic energy and the speed are zero, so if the
object were initially traveling upward, its velocity would go through zero there, and would be a turning point in
the motion. At ground level, , the potential energy is zero, and the kinetic energy and the speed are
maximum:
The maximum speed gives the initial velocity necessary to reach the maximum height, and
represents the final velocity, after falling from You can read all this information, and more, from the potential
energy diagram we have shown.
Consider a mass-spring system on a frictionless, stationary, horizontal surface, so that gravity and the normal
contact force do no work and can be ignored (Figure 8.11). This is like a one-dimensional system, whose mechanical
energy E is a constant and whose potential energy, with respect to zero energy at zero displacement from the
spring’s unstretched length, .
FIGURE 8.11 (a) A glider between springs on an air track is an example of a horizontal mass-spring system. (b) The potential energy
diagram for this system, with various quantities indicated.
You can read off the same type of information from the potential energy diagram in this case, as in the case for the
body in vertical free fall, but since the spring potential energy describes a variable force, you can learn more from
this graph. As for the object in vertical free fall, you can deduce the physically allowable range of motion and the
maximum values of distance and speed, from the limits on the kinetic energy, Therefore, and
at a turning point, of which there are two for the elastic spring potential energy,
The glider’s motion is confined to the region between the turning points, This is true for any
(positive) value of E because the potential energy is unbounded with respect to x. For this reason, as well as the
shape of the potential energy curve, U(x) is called an infinite potential well. At the bottom of the potential well,
and the kinetic energy is a maximum,
However, from the slope of this potential energy curve, you can also deduce information about the force on the
glider and its acceleration. We saw earlier that the negative of the slope of the potential energy is the spring force,
which in this case is also the net force, and thus is proportional to the acceleration. When , the slope, the
force, and the acceleration are all zero, so this is an equilibrium point. The negative of the slope, on either side of
the equilibrium point, gives a force pointing back to the equilibrium point, so the equilibrium is termed
stable and the force is called a restoring force. This implies that U(x) has a relative minimum there. If the force on
Access for free at openstax.org