# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 394-403
############################################################

382 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
9.2 Impulse and Collisions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what an impulse is, physically
• Describe what an impulse does
• Relate impulses to collisions
• Apply the impulse-momentum theorem to solve problems
We have defined momentum to be the product of mass and velocity. Therefore, if an object’s velocity should change
(due to the application of a force on the object), then necessarily, its momentum changes as well. This indicates a
connection between momentum and force. The purpose of this section is to explore and describe that connection.
Suppose you apply a force on a free object for some amount of time. Clearly, the larger the force, the larger the
object’s change of momentum will be. Alternatively, the more time you spend applying this force, again the larger
the change of momentum will be, as depicted in Figure 9.5. The amount by which the object’s motion changes is
therefore proportional to the magnitude of the force, and also to the time interval over which the force is applied.
FIGURE 9.5 The change in momentum of an object is proportional to the length of time during which the force is applied. If a force is
exerted on the lower ball for twice as long as on the upper ball, then the change in the momentum of the lower ball is twice that of the
upper ball.
Mathematically, if a quantity is proportional to two (or more) things, then it is proportional to the product of those
things. The product of a force and a time interval (over which that force acts) is called impulse, and is given the
symbol
IMPULSE
Let be the force applied to an object over some differential time interval dt (Figure 9.6). The resulting
impulse on the object is defined as
9.2
Access for free at openstax.org

9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 383
FIGURE 9.6 A force applied by a tennis racquet to a tennis ball over a time interval generates an impulse acting on the ball.
The total impulse over the interval is
9.3
Equation 9.2 and Equation 9.3 together say that when a force is applied for an infinitesimal time interval dt, it
causes an infinitesimal impulse , and the total impulse given to the object is defined to be the sum (integral) of all
these infinitesimal impulses.
To calculate the impulse using Equation 9.3, we need to know the force function F(t), which we often don’t.
However, a result from calculus is useful here: Recall that the average value of a function over some interval is
calculated by
where . Applying this to the time-dependent force function, we obtain
9.4
Therefore, from Equation 9.3,
9.5
The idea here is that you can calculate the impulse on the object even if you don’t know the details of the force as a
function of time; you only need the average force. In fact, though, the process is usually reversed: You determine the
impulse (by measurement or calculation) and then calculate the average force that caused that impulse.
To calculate the impulse, a useful result follows from writing the force in Equation 9.3 as :

384 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
For a constant force , this simplifies to
That is,
9.6
Note that the integral form, Equation 9.3, applies to constant forces as well; in that case, since the force is
independent of time, it comes out of the integral, which can then be trivially evaluated.
EXAMPLE 9.1
The Arizona Meteor Crater
Approximately 50,000 years ago, a large (radius of 25 m) iron-nickel meteorite collided with Earth at an estimated
speed of in what is now the northern Arizona desert, in the United States. The impact produced a
crater that is still visible today (Figure 9.7); it is approximately 1200 m (three-quarters of a mile) in diameter, 170 m
deep, and has a rim that rises 45 m above the surrounding desert plain. Iron-nickel meteorites typically have a
density of . Use impulse considerations to estimate the average force and the maximum force that
the meteor applied to Earth during the impact.
FIGURE 9.7 The Arizona Meteor Crater in Flagstaff, Arizona (often referred to as the Barringer Crater after the person who first suggested
its origin and whose family owns the land). (credit: modification of work by “Shane.torgerson”/Wikimedia Commons)
Strategy
It is conceptually easier to reverse the question and calculate the force that Earth applied on the meteor in order to
stop it. Therefore, we’ll calculate the force on the meteor and then use Newton’s third law to argue that the force
from the meteor on Earth was equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
Using the given data about the meteor, and making reasonable guesses about the shape of the meteor and impact
time, we first calculate the impulse using Equation 9.6. We then use the relationship between force and impulse
Equation 9.5 to estimate the average force during impact. Next, we choose a reasonable force function for the
impact event, calculate the average value of that function Equation 9.4, and set the resulting expression equal to the
calculated average force. This enables us to solve for the maximum force.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 385
Solution
Define upward to be the +y-direction. For simplicity, assume the meteor is traveling vertically downward prior to
impact. In that case, its initial velocity is , and the force Earth exerts on the meteor points upward,
. The situation at is depicted below.
The average force during the impact is related to the impulse by
From Equation 9.6, , so we have
The mass is equal to the product of the meteor’s density and its volume:
If we assume (guess) that the meteor was roughly spherical, we have
Thus we obtain
The problem says the velocity at impact was (the final velocity is zero); also, we guess that the
primary impact lasted about . Substituting these values gives
This is the average force applied during the collision. Notice that this force vector points in the same direction as the
change of velocity vector .
Next, we calculate the maximum force. The impulse is related to the force function by

386 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
We need to make a reasonable choice for the force as a function of time. We define to be the moment the
meteor first touches the ground. Then we assume the force is a maximum at impact, and rapidly drops to zero. A
function that does this is
(The parameter represents how rapidly the force decreases to zero.) The average force is
where . Since we already have a numeric value for , we can use the result of the integral to
obtain .
Choosing (this is a common choice, as you will see in later chapters), and guessing that , this
integral evaluates to
Thus, the maximum force has a magnitude of
The complete force function, including the direction, is
This is the force Earth applied to the meteor; by Newton’s third law, the force the meteor applied to Earth is
which is the answer to the original question.
Significance
The graph of this function contains important information. Let’s graph (the magnitude of) both this function and the
average force together (Figure 9.8).
FIGURE 9.8 A graph of the average force (in red) and the force as a function of time (blue) of the meteor impact. The areas under the curves
Access for free at openstax.org

9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 387
are equal to each other, and are numerically equal to the applied impulse.
Notice that the area under each plot has been filled in. For the plot of the (constant) force , the area is a
rectangle, corresponding to . As for the plot of F(t), recall from calculus that the area under the plot of a
function is numerically equal to the integral of that function, over the specified interval; so here, that is
. Thus, the areas are equal, and both represent the impulse that the meteor applied to Earth
during the two-second impact. The average force on Earth sounds like a huge force, and it is. Nevertheless, Earth
barely noticed it. The acceleration Earth obtained was just
which is completely immeasurable. That said, the impact created seismic waves that nowadays could be detected
by modern monitoring equipment.
EXAMPLE 9.2
The Benefits of Impulse
A car traveling at 27 m/s collides with a building. The collision with the building causes the car to come to a stop in
approximately 1 second. The driver, who weighs 860 N, is protected by a combination of a variable-tension seatbelt
and an airbag (Figure 9.9). (In effect, the driver collides with the seatbelt and airbag and not with the building.) The
airbag and seatbelt slow his velocity, such that he comes to a stop in approximately 2.5 s.
a. What average force does the driver experience during the collision?
b. Without the seatbelt and airbag, his collision time (with the steering wheel) would have been approximately
0.20 s. What force would he experience in this case?
FIGURE 9.9 The motion of a car and its driver at the instant before and the instant after colliding with the wall. The restrained driver
experiences a large backward force from the seatbelt and airbag, which causes his velocity to decrease to zero. (The forward force from the
seatbelt is much smaller than the backward force, so we neglect it in the solution.)
Strategy
We are given the driver’s weight, his initial and final velocities, and the time of collision; we are asked to calculate a
force. Impulse seems the right way to tackle this; we can combine Equation 9.5 and Equation 9.6.
Solution
a. Define the +x-direction to be the direction the car is initially moving. We know
and

388 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Since J is equal to both those things, they must be equal to each other:
We need to convert this weight to the equivalent mass, expressed in SI units:
Remembering that , and noting that the final velocity is zero, we solve for the force:
The negative sign implies that the force slows him down. For perspective, this is about 1.1 times his own
weight.
b. Same calculation, just the different time interval:
which is about 14 times his own weight. Big difference!
Significance
You see that the value of an airbag is how greatly it reduces the force on the vehicle occupants. For this reason, they
have been required on all passenger vehicles in the United States since 1991, and have been commonplace
throughout Europe and Asia since the mid-1990s. The change of momentum in a crash is the same, with or without
an airbag; the force, however, is vastly different.
Effect of Impulse
Since an impulse is a force acting for some amount of time, it causes an object’s motion to change. Recall Equation
9.6:
Because is the momentum of a system, is the change of momentum . This gives us the following
relation, called the impulse-momentum theorem (or relation).
IMPULSE-MOMENTUM THEOREM
An impulse applied to a system changes the system’s momentum, and that change of momentum is exactly
equal to the impulse that was applied:
9.7
The impulse-momentum theorem is depicted graphically in Figure 9.10.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 389
FIGURE 9.10 Illustration of impulse-momentum theorem. (a) A ball with initial velocity and momentum receives an impulse . (b)
This impulse is added vectorially to the initial momentum. (c) Thus, the impulse equals the change in momentum, . (d) After the
impulse, the ball moves off with its new momentum
There are two crucial concepts in the impulse-momentum theorem:
1. Impulse is a vector quantity; an impulse of, say, is very different from an impulse of
; they cause completely opposite changes of momentum.
2. An impulse does not cause momentum; rather, it causes a change in the momentum of an object. Thus, you
must subtract the initial momentum from the final momentum, and—since momentum is also a vector
quantity—you must take careful account of the signs of the momentum vectors.
The most common questions asked in relation to impulse are to calculate the applied force, or the change of velocity
that occurs as a result of applying an impulse. The general approach is the same.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Impulse-Momentum Theorem
1. Express the impulse as force times the relevant time interval.
2. Express the impulse as the change of momentum, usually .
3. Equate these and solve for the desired quantity.

390 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
EXAMPLE 9.3
Moving the Enterprise
FIGURE 9.11 The fictional starship Enterprise from the Star Trek adventures operated on so-called “impulse engines” that combined
matter with antimatter to produce energy.
When Captain Picard commands, “Take us out,” the starship Enterprise (Figure 9.11) starts from rest to a final speed
of . Assuming this maneuver is completed in 60 s, what average force did the impulse engines
apply to the ship?
Strategy
We are asked for a force; we know the initial and final speeds (and hence the change in speed), and we know the
time interval over which this all happened. In particular, we know the amount of time that the force acted. This
suggests using the impulse-momentum relation. To use that, though, we need the mass of the Enterprise. An
internet search gives a best estimate of the mass of the Enterprise (in the 2009 movie) as .
Solution
Because this problem involves only one direction (i.e., the direction of the force applied by the engines), we only
need the scalar form of the impulse-momentum theorem Equation 9.7, which is
with
and
Equating these expressions gives
Solving for the magnitude of the force and inserting the given values leads to
Access for free at openstax.org