# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 384-390
############################################################

374 Chapter 8 | Capacitance
Figure 8.22 A dielectric is inserted into the charged capacitor while the
capacitor remains connected to the battery.
Strategy
Weidentifytheknownvalues: V , C ,E , κ,and Q .Ourtaskistoexpresstheunknownvaluesintermsof
0 0 0 0
these known values.
Solution
(a) The capacitance of the filled capacitor is C=κC . Since the battery is always connected to the capacitor
0
plates, the potential difference between them does not change; hence, V =V . Because of that, the electrical
0
field in the filled capacitor is the same as the field in the empty capacitor, so we can obtain directly that
E= V = V 0 =E .
d d 0
(b) For the filled capacitor, the free charge on the plates is
Q=CV =(κC )V =κ(C V )=κQ .
0 0 0 0 0
The electrical field E in the filled capacitor is due to the effective charge Q−Q (Figure 8.22(b)). Since
i
E=E , we have
0
Q−Q Q
i = 0 .
ε A ε A
0 0
Solving this equation for Q , we obtain for the induced charge
i
Q =Q−Q =κQ −Q =(κ−1)Q .
i 0 0 0 0
Significance
Noticethatformaterialswithdielectricconstantslargerthan2(seeTable8.1),theinducedchargeonthesurface
ofdielectricislargerthanthechargeontheplatesofavacuumcapacitor.Theoppositeistrueforgasseslikeair
whose dielectric constant is smaller than 2.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 8 | Capacitance 375
8.8 CheckYourUnderstandingContinuingwithExample8.12,showthatwhenthebatteryisconnected
acrosstheplatestheenergystoredindielectric-filledcapacitoris U =κU (largerthantheenergy U ofan
0 0
emptycapacitorkeptatthesamevoltage).Comparethisresultwiththeresult U =U /κ foundpreviouslyfor
0
an isolated, charged capacitor.
8.9 CheckYourUnderstandingRepeatthecalculationsofExample8.10forthecaseinwhichthebattery
remains connected while the dielectric is placed in the capacitor.

376 Chapter 8 | Capacitance
CHAPTER 8 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
capacitance amount of charge stored per unit volt
capacitor device that stores electrical charge and electrical energy
dielectric insulating material used to fill the space between two plates
dielectric breakdown phenomenon that occurs when an insulator becomes a conductor in a strong electrical field
dielectric constant factorbywhichcapacitanceincreaseswhenadielectricisinsertedbetweentheplatesofacapacitor
dielectric strength critical electrical field strength above which molecules in insulator begin to break down and the
insulator starts to conduct
energy density energy stored in a capacitor divided by the volume between the plates
induced electric-dipole moment dipole moment that a nonpolar molecule may acquire when it is placed in an
electrical field
induced electrical field electrical field in the dielectric due to the presence of induced charges
induced surface charges charges that occur on a dielectric surface due to its polarization
parallel combination componentsinacircuitarrangedwithonesideofeachcomponentconnectedtoonesideofthe
circuit and the other sides of the components connected to the other side of the circuit
parallel-plate capacitor system of two identical parallel conducting plates separated by a distance
series combination components in a circuit arranged in a row one after the other in a circuit
KEY EQUATIONS
Capacitance Q
C=
V
Capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor A
C=ε
0d
Capacitance of a vacuum spherical capacitor R R
C=4πε 1 2
0R −R
2 1
Capacitance of a vacuum cylindrical capacitor 2πε l
C= 0
ln(R /R )
2 1
Capacitance of a series combination 1 1 1 1
= + + +⋯
C C C C
S 1 2 3
Capacitance of a parallel combination C =C +C +C +⋯
P 1 2 3
Energy density u E= 1
2
ε
0
E2
Energy stored in a capacitor Q2
U C= 1
2
V2C= 1
2 C
= 1
2
QV
Capacitance of a capacitor with dielectric C=κC
0
E di n e e le rg ct y r i s c tored in an isolated capacitor with U = 1 κ U 0
Dielectric constant E
κ= 0
E
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 8 | Capacitance 377
Induced electrical field in a dielectric → ⎛1 ⎞→
E i = ⎝κ −1 ⎠ E 0
SUMMARY
8.1Capacitors and Capacitance
• A capacitor is a device that stores an electrical charge and electrical energy. The amount of charge a vacuum
capacitorcanstoredependsontwomajorfactors:thevoltageappliedandthecapacitor’sphysicalcharacteristics,
such as its size and geometry.
• Thecapacitanceofacapacitorisaparameterthattellsushowmuchchargecanbestoredinthecapacitorperunit
potentialdifferencebetweenitsplates.Capacitanceofasystemofconductorsdependsonlyonthegeometryoftheir
arrangementandphysicalpropertiesoftheinsulatingmaterialthatfillsthespacebetweentheconductors.Theunit
of capacitance is the farad, where 1F=1C/1V.
8.2Capacitors in Series and in Parallel
• Whenseveralcapacitorsareconnectedinaseriescombination,thereciprocaloftheequivalentcapacitanceisthe
sum of the reciprocals of the individual capacitances.
• When several capacitors are connected in a parallel combination, the equivalent capacitance is the sum of the
individual capacitances.
• Whenanetworkofcapacitorscontainsacombinationofseriesandparallelconnections,weidentifytheseriesand
parallelnetworks,andcomputetheirequivalentcapacitancesstepbystepuntiltheentirenetworkbecomesreduced
to one equivalent capacitance.
8.3Energy Stored in a Capacitor
• Capacitors are used to supply energy to a variety of devices, including defibrillators, microelectronics such as
calculators, and flash lamps.
• Theenergystoredinacapacitoristheworkrequiredtochargethecapacitor,beginningwithnochargeonitsplates.
Theenergyisstored intheelectrical field inthespace between thecapacitor plates. Itdepends ontheamount of
electrical charge on the plates and on the potential difference between the plates.
• Theenergystoredinacapacitornetworkisthesumoftheenergiesstoredonindividualcapacitorsinthenetwork.
It can be computed as the energy stored in the equivalent capacitor of the network.
8.4Capacitor with a Dielectric
• Thecapacitanceofanemptycapacitorisincreasedbyafactorof κ whenthespacebetweenitsplatesiscompletely
filled by a dielectric with dielectric constant κ.
• Each dielectric material has its specific dielectric constant.
• Theenergystoredinanemptyisolatedcapacitorisdecreasedbyafactorof κ whenthespacebetweenitsplatesis
completely filled with a dielectric with dielectric constant κ.
8.5Molecular Model of a Dielectric
• Whenadielectricisinsertedbetweentheplatesofacapacitor,equalandoppositesurfacechargeisinducedonthe
twofacesofthedielectric.Theinducedsurfacechargeproducesaninducedelectricalfieldthatopposesthefieldof
the free charge on the capacitor plates.
• The dielectric constant of a material is the ratio of the electrical field in vacuum to the net electrical field in the
material. A capacitor filled with dielectric has a larger capacitance than an empty capacitor.
• The dielectric strength of an insulator represents a critical value of electrical field at which the molecules in an
insulatingmaterialstarttobecomeionized.Whenthishappens,thematerialcanconductanddielectricbreakdown
is observed.

378 Chapter 8 | Capacitance
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
10. Discusshowtheenergystoredinanemptybutcharged
8.1Capacitors and Capacitance capacitor changes when a dielectric is inserted if (a) the
capacitorisisolatedsothatitschargedoesnotchange;(b)
1. Doesthecapacitanceofadevicedependontheapplied
the capacitor remains connected to a battery so that the
voltage? Does the capacitance of a device depend on the
potential difference between its plates does not change.
charge residing on it?
2. Wouldyouplacetheplatesofaparallel-platecapacitor
8.5Molecular Model of a Dielectric
closer together or farther apart to increase their
capacitance? 11. Distinguish between dielectric strength and dielectric
constant.
3. Thevalueofthecapacitanceiszeroiftheplatesarenot
charged. True or false? 12. Waterisagoodsolventbecauseithasahighdielectric
constant. Explain.
4. Iftheplatesofacapacitorhavedifferentareas,willthey
acquire the same charge when the capacitor is connected 13. Waterhasahighdielectricconstant.Explainwhyitis
across a battery? then not used as a dielectric material in capacitors.
5. Doesthecapacitanceofasphericalcapacitordependon 14. Elaborate on why molecules in a dielectric material
which sphere is charged positively or negatively? experience net forces on them in a non-uniform electrical
field but not in a uniform field.
8.2Capacitors in Series and in Parallel 15. Explain why the dielectric constant of a substance
containing permanent molecular electric dipoles decreases
6. If you wish to store a large amount of charge in a
with increasing temperature.
capacitorbank,wouldyouconnectcapacitorsinseriesorin
parallel? Explain.
16. Give a reason why a dielectric material increases
capacitance compared with what it would be with air
7. What is the maximum capacitance you can get by
between the plates of a capacitor. How does a dielectric
connectingthree 1.0-µF capacitors?Whatistheminimum
material also allow a greater voltage to be applied to a
capacitance?
capacitor? (The dielectric thus increases C and permits a
greaterV.)
8.3Energy Stored in a Capacitor
17. Elaborate on the way in which the polar character of
8. If you wish to store a large amount of energy in a water molecules helps to explain water’s relatively large
capacitor bank, would you connect capacitors in series or dielectric constant.
parallel? Explain.
18. Sparks will occur between the plates of an air-filled
capacitor at a lower voltage when the air is humid than
8.4Capacitor with a Dielectric whenitisdry.Discusswhy,consideringthepolarcharacter
of water molecules.
9. Discusswhatwouldhappenifaconductingslabrather
than a dielectric were inserted into the gap between the
capacitor plates.
PROBLEMS
21. Calculatethevoltageappliedtoa 2.00-µF capacitor
8.1Capacitors and Capacitance
when it holds 3.10µC of charge.
19. Whatchargeisstoredina 180.0-µF capacitorwhen
120.0 V is applied to it?
22. Whatvoltagemustbeappliedtoan8.00-nFcapacitor
to store 0.160 mC of charge?
20. Find the charge stored when 5.50 V is applied to an
8.00-pF capacitor.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 8 | Capacitance 379
23. What capacitance is needed to store 3.00µC of 34. Suppose you need a capacitor bank with a total
capacitance of 0.750 F but you have only 1.50-mF
charge at a voltage of 120 V?
capacitorsatyourdisposal.Whatisthesmallestnumberof
capacitorsyoucouldconnecttogethertoachieveyourgoal,
24. What is the capacitance of a large Van de Graaff
and how would you connect them?
generator’sterminal,giventhatitstores8.00mCofcharge
at a voltage of 12.0 MV?
35. Whattotalcapacitances canyoumakebyconnecting
a 5.00-µF and a 8.00-µF capacitor?
25. The plates of an empty parallel-plate capacitor of
capacitance 5.0 pF are 2.0 mm apart. What is the area of
each plate? 36. Findtheequivalentcapacitanceofthecombinationof
series and parallel capacitors shown below.
26. A 60.0-pF vacuum capacitor has a plate area of
0.010m2. What is the separation between its plates?
27. A set of parallel plates has a capacitance of 5.0µF.
How much charge must be added to the plates to increase
the potential difference between them by 100 V?
28. Consider Earth to be a spherical conductor of radius
37. Findthe net capacitance ofthe combination ofseries
6400 km and calculate its capacitance.
and parallel capacitors shown below.
29. If the capacitance per unit length of a cylindrical
capacitoris20pF/m,whatistheratiooftheradiiofthetwo
cylinders?
30. Anemptyparallel-platecapacitorhasacapacitanceof
20 µF.Howmuchchargemustleakoffitsplatesbefore
the voltage across them is reduced by 100 V?
38. A40-pFcapacitorischargedtoapotentialdifference
8.2Capacitors in Series and in Parallel of 500 V. Its terminals are then connected to those of an
uncharged 10-pF capacitor. Calculate: (a) the original
31. A 4.00-pF is connected in series with an 8.00-pF
charge on the 40-pF capacitor; (b) the charge on each
capacitoranda400-Vpotentialdifferenceisappliedacross
capacitoraftertheconnectionismade;and(c)thepotential
thepair.(a)Whatisthechargeoneachcapacitor?(b)What
difference across the plates of each capacitor after the
is the voltage across each capacitor?
connection.
32. Threecapacitors,withcapacitancesof C =2.0µF,
1 39. A 2.0-µF capacitor and a 4.0-µF capacitor are
C =3.0µF, and C =6.0µF, respectively, are
2 3 connectedinseriesacrossa1.0-kVpotential.Thecharged
connected in parallel. A 500-V potential difference is capacitors are then disconnected from the source and
applied across the combination. Determine the voltage connectedtoeachotherwithterminalsoflikesigntogether.
across each capacitor and the charge on each capacitor. Find the charge on each capacitor and the voltage across
each capacitor.
33. Findthetotalcapacitanceofthiscombinationofseries
and parallel capacitors shown below.
8.3Energy Stored in a Capacitor
40. Howmuchenergyisstoredinan 8.00-µF capacitor
whose plates are at a potential difference of 6.00 V?
41. A capacitor has a charge of 2.5µC when connected
to a 6.0-V battery. How much energy is stored in this
capacitor?