# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 180-185
############################################################

170 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Strategy
Since the objects are identical, their common temperature at equilibrium is 350 K. To calculate the entropy
changesassociatedwiththeirtransitions,wesubstitutetheirreversibleprocessoftheheattransferbytwoisobaric,
reversible processes, one for each of the two objects. The entropy change for each object is then given by
ΔS=mcln(T B/T A).
Solution
Using c=450J/kg·K, the specific heat of steel, we have for the hotter object
T
ΔS =⌠ 2 mcdT =mcln T 2
h ⌡T T T
1
1
350K
=(4.00kg)(450J/kg·K)ln =−240J/K.
400K
Similarly, the entropy change of the cooler object is
ΔS c=(4.00kg)(450J/kg·K)ln 3
3
5
0
0
0
K
K
=277J/K.
The net entropy change of the two objects during the heat transfer is then
ΔS
h
+ΔS c=37J/K.
Significance
Theobjectsarethermallyisolatedfromtheenvironment,soitsentropymustremainconstant.Thus,theentropy
of the universe also increases by 37 J/K.
4.6 CheckYourUnderstandingAquantityofheatQisabsorbedfromareservoiratatemperature T bya
h
coolerreservoiratatemperature T c. Whatistheentropychangeofthehotreservoir,thecoldreservoir,andthe
universe?
4.7 Check Your Understanding A 50-g copper piece at a temperature of 20°C is placed into a large
insulatedvatofwaterat 100°C.(a)Whatistheentropychangeofthecopperpiecewhenitreachesthermal
equilibriumwiththewater?(b)Whatistheentropychangeofthewater?(c)Whatistheentropychangeofthe
universe?
Viewthissite(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21reversereact)tolearnaboutentropyandmicrostates.Start
with a large barrier in the middle and 1000 molecules in only the left chamber. What is the total entropy of the
system?Nowremovethebarrierandletthemoleculestravelfromthelefttotherighthandside?Whatisthetotal
entropyofthesystemnow?Lastly,addheatandnotewhathappenstothetemperature.Didthisincreaseentropy
of the system?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 171
CHAPTER 4 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
Carnot cycle cycle that consists of two isotherms at the temperatures of two reservoirs and two adiabatic processes
connecting the isotherms
Carnot engine Carnot heat engine, refrigerator, or heat pump that operates on a Carnot cycle
Carnot principle principlegoverningtheefficiencyorperformanceofaheatdeviceoperatingonaCarnotcycle:any
reversible heat device working between two reservoirs must have the same efficiency or performance coefficient,
greater than that of an irreversible heat device operating between the same two reservoirs
Clausius statement of the second law of thermodynamics heatneverflowsspontaneouslyfromacolderobject
to a hotter object
coefficient of performance measure of effectiveness of a refrigerator or heat pump
cold reservoir sink of heat used by a heat engine
disorder measure of order in a system; the greater the disorder is, the higher the entropy
efficiency (e) output work from the engine over the input heat to the engine from the hot reservoir
entropy state function of the system that changes when heat is transferred between the system and the environment
entropy statement of the second law of thermodynamics entropy of a closed system or the entire universe
never decreases
heat engine device that converts heat into work
heat pump device that delivers heat to a hot reservoir
hot reservoir source of heat used by a heat engine
irreversibility phenomenon associated with a natural process
irreversible process processinwhichneitherthesystemnoritsenvironmentcanberestoredtotheiroriginalstatesat
the same time
isentropic reversible adiabatic process where the process is frictionless and no heat is transferred
Kelvin statement of the second law of thermodynamics itisimpossibletoconverttheheatfromasinglesource
into work without any other effect
perfect engine engine that can convert heat into work with 100% efficiency
perfect refrigerator (heat pump) refrigerator (heat pump) that can remove (dump) heat without any input of work
refrigerator device that removes heat from a cold reservoir
reversible process processinwhichboththesystemandtheexternalenvironmenttheoreticallycanbereturnedtotheir
original states
third law of thermodynamics absolutezerotemperaturecannotbereachedthroughanyfinitenumberofcoolingsteps
KEY EQUATIONS
Result of energy conservation W =Q
h
−Q
c
Efficiency of a heat engine e= W =1− Q c
Q Q
h h
Coefficient of performance of a refrigerator Q Q
K = c = c
R W Q
h
−Q
c

172 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Coefficient of performance of a heat pump Q Q
K = h = h
P W Q
h
−Q
c
Resulting efficiency of a Carnot cycle T
e=1− c
T
h
Performance coefficient of a reversible refrigerator T
K = c
R T
h
−T
c
Performance coefficient of a reversible heat pump T
K = h
P T
h
−T
c
Entropy of a system undergoing a reversible process at a constant Q
ΔS=
temperature T
Change of entropy of a system under a reversible process B
ΔS=S B−S A=∫ dQ/T
A
Entropy of a system undergoing any complete reversible cyclic process dQ
∮dS=∮ =0
T
Change of entropy of a closed system under an irreversible process ΔS≥0
Change in entropy of the system along an isotherm lim (ΔS)T =0
T→0
SUMMARY
4.1Reversible and Irreversible Processes
• Areversibleprocessisoneinwhichboththesystemanditsenvironmentcanreturntoexactlythestatestheywere
in by following the reverse path.
• Anirreversibleprocessisoneinwhichthesystemanditsenvironmentcannotreturntogethertoexactlythestates
that they were in.
• The irreversibility of any natural process results from the second law of thermodynamics.
4.2Heat Engines
• The work done by a heat engine is the difference between the heat absorbed from the hot reservoir and the heat
discharged to the cold reservoir, that is, W =Q
h
−Q c.
• Theratiooftheworkdonebytheengineandtheheatabsorbedfromthehotreservoirprovidestheefficiencyofthe
engine, that is, e=W/Q
h
=1−Q c/Q
h
.
4.3Refrigerators and Heat Pumps
• A refrigerator or a heat pump is a heat engine run in reverse.
• The focus of a refrigerator is on removing heat from the cold reservoir with a coefficient of performance K .
R
• The focus of a heat pump is on dumping heat to the hot reservoir with a coefficient of performance K .
P
4.4Statements of the Second Law of Thermodynamics
• TheKelvinstatementofthesecondlawofthermodynamics:Itisimpossibletoconverttheheatfromasinglesource
into work without any other effect.
• The Kelvin statement and Clausius statement of the second law of thermodynamics are equivalent.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 173
4.5The Carnot Cycle
• The Carnot cycle is the most efficient engine for a reversible cycle designed between two reservoirs.
• The Carnot principle is another way of stating the second law of thermodynamics.
4.6Entropy
• The change in entropy for a reversible process at constant temperature is equal to the heat divided by the
B
temperature. The entropy change of a system under a reversible process is given by ΔS=∫ dQ/T.
A
• Asystem’schangeinentropybetweentwostatesisindependentofthereversiblethermodynamicpathtakenbythe
system when it makes a transition between the states.
4.7Entropy on a Microscopic Scale
• Entropy can be related to how disordered a system is—the more it is disordered, the higher is its entropy. In any
irreversible process, the universe becomes more disordered.
• According to the third law of thermodynamics, absolute zero temperature is unreachable.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
heat pumps and electric heating.
4.1Reversible and Irreversible Processes
1. Stateanexampleofaprocessthatoccursinnaturethat 8. The energy output of a heat pump is greater than the
is as close to reversible as it can be. energy used to operate the pump. Why doesn’t this
statement violate the first law of thermodynamics?
4.2Heat Engines 9. Speculate as to why nuclear power plants are less
efficient than fossil-fuel plants based on temperature
2. Explaininpracticaltermswhyefficiencyisdefinedas
arguments.
W/Q .
h
10. An ideal gas goes from state (p, V) to state
i i
4.3Refrigerators and Heat Pumps (p f , V f ) whenitisallowedtoexpandfreely.Isitpossible
to represent the actual process on apVdiagram? Explain.
3. Iftherefrigeratordoorisleftopen,whathappenstothe
temperature of the kitchen?
4.5The Carnot Cycle
4. Is it possible for the efficiency of a reversible engine
to be greater than 1.0? Is it possible for the coefficient of 11. To increase the efficiency of a Carnot engine, should
performanceofareversiblerefrigeratortobelessthan1.0? the temperature of the hot reservoir be raised or lowered?
What about the cold reservoir?
4.4Statements of the Second Law of 12. How could you design a Carnot engine with 100%
Thermodynamics efficiency?
5. Inthetext,weshowedthatiftheClausiusstatementis
13. What type of processes occur in a Carnot cycle?
false, the Kelvin statement must also be false. Now show
the reverse, such that if the Kelvin statement is false, it
follows that the Clausius statement is false.
4.6Entropy
6. Why don’t we operate ocean liners by extracting heat 14. DoestheentropyincreaseforaCarnotengineforeach
fromtheoceanoroperateairplanesbyextractingheatfrom cycle?
the atmosphere?
15. Is it possible for a system to have an entropy change
7. Discuss the practical advantages and disadvantages of if it neither absorbs nor emits heat during a reversible

174 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
transition? What happens if the process is irreversible? leaksintothesurroundingatmosphere;(c)anicecubethat
meltsinaglassoflukewarmwater;(d)thelukewarmwater
of part (c); (e) a real heat engine performing a cycle; (f)
4.7Entropy on a Microscopic Scale foodcooled in a refrigerator.
16. Are the entropy changes of the systems in the
17. Discuss the entropy changes in the systems of
following processes positive or negative? (a) water vapor
Question 21.10 in terms of disorder.
thatcondensesonacoldsurface;(b)gasinacontainerthat
PROBLEMS
26. Thetemperatureofthecoldreservoiroftheengineis
4.1Reversible and Irreversible Processes 300K.Ithasanefficiencyof0.30andabsorbs500Jofheat
per cycle. (a) How much work does it perform per cycle?
18. A tank contains 111.0 g chlorine gas (Cl ), which
2 (b) How much heat does it discharge per cycle?
is at temperature 82.0°C and absolute pressure
5.70×10 5 Pa. Thetemperatureoftheairoutsidethetank 27. An engine absorbs three times as much heat as it
is 20.0°C. The molar mass of Cl is 70.9 g/mol. (a) discharges. The work done by the engine per cycle is 50
2
J. Calculate (a) the efficiency of the engine, (b) the heat
What is the volume of the tank? (b) What is the internal
absorbed per cycle, and (c) the heat discharged per cycle.
energy of the gas? (c) What is the work done by the gas
if the temperature and pressure inside the tank drop to
28. A coal power plant consumes 100,000 kg of coal
31.0°C and 3.80×10 5 Pa, respectively, due to a leak?
per hour and produces 500 MW of power. If the heat of
combustion of coal is 30 MJ/kg, what is the efficiency of
19. Amoleofidealmonatomicgasat 0°C and1.00atm the power plant?
is warmed up to expand isobarically to triple its volume.
How much heat is transferred during the process?
4.3Refrigerators and Heat Pumps
20. A mole of an ideal gas at pressure 4.00 atm and 29. Arefrigeratorhasacoefficientofperformanceof3.0.
temperature 298 K expands isothermally to double its (a) If it requires 200 J of work per cycle, how much heat
volume. What is the work done by the gas? percycledoesitremovethecoldreservoir?(b)Howmuch
heat per cycle is discarded to the hot reservoir?
21. Afterafreeexpansiontoquadrupleitsvolume,amole
of ideal diatomic gas is compressed back to its original 30. Duringonecycle,arefrigeratorremoves500Jfroma
volume isobarically and then cooled down to its original coldreservoiranddischarges800Jtoitshotreservoir.(a)
temperature.Whatistheminimumheatremovedfromthe Whatisitscoefficientofperformance?(b)Howmuchwork
gas in the final step to restoring its state? per cycle does it require to operate?
31. Ifarefrigeratordiscards80Jofheatpercycleandits
4.2Heat Engines coefficientofperformanceis6.0,whatare(a)thequantity
22. Anengineisfoundtohaveanefficiencyof0.40.Ifit offheatitremovespercyclefromacoldreservoirand(b)
does 200 J of work per cycle, what are the corresponding the amount of work per cycle required for its operation?
quantities of heat absorbed and discharged?
32. Arefrigeratorhasacoefficientofperformanceof3.0.
23. In performing 100.0 J of work, an engine discharges (a) If it requires 200 J of work per cycle, how much heat
50.0 J of heat. What is the efficiency of the engine? percycledoesitremovethecoldreservoir?(b)Howmuch
heat per cycle is discarded to the hot reservoir?
24. An engine with an efficiency of 0.30 absorbs 500 J
ofheatpercycle.(a)Howmuchworkdoesitperformper
cycle? (b) How much heat does it discharge per cycle? 4.5The Carnot Cycle
33. The temperature of the cold and hot reservoirs
25. It is found that an engine discharges 100.0 J while betweenwhichaCarnotrefrigeratoroperatesare −73°C
absorbing 125.0 J each cycle of operation. (a) What is and 270°C, respectively. Which is its coefficient of
the efficiency of the engine? (b) How much work does it
performance?
perform per cycle?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9