# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 160-167
############################################################

150 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
With a heat engine working between two heat reservoirs, we get outWand put in Q , so the efficiency of the engine is
h
e= W =1− Q c. (4.2)
Q Q
h h
Here, we usedEquation 4.1, W =Q
h
−Q c, in the final step of this expression for the efficiency.
Example 4.1
A Lawn Mower
A lawn mower is rated to have an efficiency of 25.0% and an average power of 3.00 kW. What are (a) the
average work and (b) the minimum heat discharge into the air by the lawn mower in one minute of use?
Strategy
From the average power—that is, the rate of work production—we can figure out the work done in the given
elapsedtime.Then,fromtheefficiencygiven,wecanfigureouttheminimumheatdischarge Q c=Q
h
(1−e)
with Q
h
=Q c+W.
Solution
a. The average work delivered by the lawn mower is
W =PΔt=3.00×10 3 ×60×1.00J=180kJ.
b. The minimum heat discharged into the air is given by
Q c=Q
h
(1−e)=(Q c+W)(1−e),
which leads to
Q c=W(1/e−1)=180×(1/0.25−1)kJ=540kJ.
Significance
As the efficiency rises, the minimum heat discharged falls. This helps our environment and atmosphere by not
having as much waste heat expelled.
4.3 | Refrigerators and Heat Pumps
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe a refrigerator and a heat pump and list their differences
• Calculate the performance coefficients of simple refrigerators and heat pumps
Thecyclesweusedtodescribetheengineintheprecedingsectionareallreversible,soeachsequenceofstepscanjustas
easilybeperformedintheoppositedirection.Inthiscase,theengineisknownasarefrigeratororaheatpump,depending
onwhatisthefocus:theheatremovedfromthecoldreservoirortheheatdumpedtothehotreservoir.Eitherarefrigerator
oraheatpumpisanenginerunninginreverse.Forarefrigerator,thefocusisonremovingheatfromaspecificarea.For
aheat pump, the focus is on dumping heat to a specific area.
Wefirstconsiderarefrigerator(Figure 4.6).Thepurposeofthisengineistoremoveheatfromthecoldreservoir,which
isthespaceinsidetherefrigeratorforanactualhouseholdrefrigeratororthespaceinsideabuildingforanair-conditioning
unit.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 151
Figure 4.6 A schematic representation of a refrigerator (or a
heat pump). The arrow next to work (W) indicates work being
put into the system.
A refrigerator (or heat pump) absorbs heat Q from the cold reservoir at Kelvin temperature T and discards heat Q
c c h
to the hot reservoir at Kelvin temperature T , while work W is done on the engine’s working substance, as shown by
h
the arrow pointing toward the system in the figure. A household refrigerator removes heat from the food within it while
exhaustingheattothesurroundingair.Therequiredwork,forwhichwepayinourelectricitybill,isperformedbythemotor
that moves a coolant through the coils. A schematic sketch of a household refrigerator is given inFigure 4.7.

152 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Figure 4.7 A schematic diagram of a household refrigerator. A coolant with a
boiling temperature below the freezing point of water is sent through the cycle
(clockwise in this diagram). The coolant extracts heat from the refrigerator at the
evaporator, causing coolant to vaporize. It is then compressed and sent through the
condenser, where it exhausts heat to the outside.
The effectiveness or coefficient of performance K of a refrigerator is measured by the heat removed from the cold
R
reservoir divided by the work done by the working substance cycle by cycle:
Q Q (4.3)
K = c = c .
R W Q
h
−Q
c
Note that we have used the condition of energy conservation, W =Q
h
−Q c, in the final step of this expression.
Theeffectiveness orcoefficientofperformance K ofaheatpumpismeasuredbytheheatdumpedtothehotreservoir
P
divided by the work done to the engine on the working substance cycle by cycle:
Q Q (4.4)
K = h = h .
P W Q
h
−Q
c
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 153
Once again, we use the energy conservation condition W =Q
h
−Q
c
to obtain the final step of this expression.
4.4 | Statements of the Second Law of Thermodynamics
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Contrast the second law of thermodynamics statements according to Kelvin and Clausius
formulations
• Interpret the second of thermodynamics via irreversibility
Earlier in this chapter, we introduced the Clausius statement of the second law of thermodynamics, which is based on
the irreversibility of spontaneous heat flow. As we remarked then, the second law of thermodynamics can be stated in
several different ways, and all of them can be shown to imply the others. In terms of heat engines, the second law of
thermodynamics may be stated as follows:
Second Law of Thermodynamics (Kelvin statement)
It is impossible to convert the heat from a single source into work without any other effect.
ThisisknownastheKelvinstatementofthesecondlawofthermodynamics.Thisstatementdescribesanunattainable
“ perfect engine,” as represented schematically in Figure 4.8(a). Note that “without any other effect” is a very strong
restriction. For example, an engine can absorb heat and turn it all into work, but not if it completes a cycle. Without
completing a cycle, the substance in the engine is not in its original state and therefore an “other effect” has occurred.
Anotherexampleisachamberofgasthatcanabsorbheatfromaheatreservoiranddoworkisothermallyagainstapiston
asitexpands.However,ifthegaswerereturnedtoitsinitialstate(thatis,madetocompleteacycle),itwouldhavetobe
compressed and heat would have to be extracted from it.
TheKelvinstatementisamanifestationofawell-knownengineeringproblem.Despiteadvancingtechnology,wearenot
abletobuildaheatenginethatis 100% efficient.Thefirstlawdoesnotexcludethepossibilityofconstructingaperfect
engine, but the second law forbids it.
Figure 4.8 (a) A “perfect heat engine” converts all input heat into work. (b) A “perfect
refrigerator” transports heat from a cold reservoir to a hot reservoir without work input. Neither
of these devices is achievable in reality.
WecanshowthattheKelvinstatementisequivalenttotheClausiusstatementifweviewthetwoobjectsintheClausius
statement as a cold reservoir and a hot reservoir. Thus, the Clausius statement becomes: It is impossible to construct a
refrigeratorthattransfersheatfromacoldreservoirtoahotreservoirwithoutaidfromanexternalsource.TheClausius
statementisrelatedtotheeverydayobservationthatheatneverflowsspontaneouslyfromacoldobjecttoahotobject.Heat
transferinthedirectionofincreasingtemperaturealwaysrequiressomeenergyinput.A“perfectrefrigerator,”shownin
Figure 4.8(b), which works without such external aid, is impossible to construct.

154 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
ToprovetheequivalenceoftheKelvinandClausiusstatements,weshowthatifonestatementisfalse,itnecessarilyfollows
thattheotherstatementisalsofalse.LetusfirstassumethattheClausiusstatementisfalse,sothattheperfectrefrigerator
ofFigure 4.8(b)doesexist.TherefrigeratorremovesheatQfromacoldreservoiratatemperature T andtransfersall
c
of it to a hot reservoir at a temperature T . Now consider a real heat engine working in the same temperature range. It
h
extractsheat Q+ΔQ fromthehotreservoir,doesworkW,anddiscardsheatQtothecoldreservoir.Fromthefirstlaw,
these quantities are related by W =(Q+ΔQ)−Q=ΔQ.
Suppose these two devices are combined as shown in Figure 4.9. The net heat removed from the hot reservoir is ΔQ,
nonetheattransferoccurstoorfromthecoldreservoir,andworkWisdoneonsomeexternalbody.Since W =ΔQ,the
combinationofaperfectrefrigeratorandarealheatengineisitselfaperfectheatengine,therebycontradictingtheKelvin
statement. Thus, if the Clausius statement is false, the Kelvin statement must also be false.
Figure 4.9 Combining a perfect refrigerator and a real heat
engine yields a perfect heat engine because W =ΔQ.
Usingthesecondlawofthermodynamics,wenowprovetwoimportantpropertiesofheatenginesoperatingbetweentwo
heat reservoirs. The first property is that any reversible engine operating between two reservoirs hasagreater efficiency
than any irreversible engine operating between the same two reservoirs.
Thesecondpropertytobedemonstratedisthatallreversibleenginesoperatingbetweenthesametworeservoirshavethe
same efficiency. To show this, we start with the two engines D and E of Figure 4.10(a), which are operating between
two common heat reservoirs at temperatures T
h
andT c. First, we assume that D is a reversible engine and that E is a
hypotheticalirreversibleenginethathasahigherefficiencythanD.Ifbothenginesperformthesameamountofwork W
per cycle, it follows fromEquation 4.2that Q
h
>Q′
h
. It then follows from the first law that Q c>Q′
c
.
Figure 4.10 (a) Two uncoupled engines D and E working between the same reservoirs. (b) The coupled engines, with D
working in reverse.
SupposethecycleofDisreversedsothatitoperatesasarefrigerator,andthetwoenginesarecoupledsuchthatthework
outputofEisusedtodriveD,asshowninFigure4.10(b).Since Q
h
>Q′
h
and Q c>Q′
c
, thenetresultofeachcycleis
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 155
equivalenttoaspontaneoustransferofheatfromthecoldreservoirtothehotreservoir,aprocessthesecondlawdoesnot
allow.Theoriginalassumptionmustthereforebewrong,anditisimpossibletoconstructanirreversibleenginesuchthatE
is more efficient than the reversible engine D.
Nowitisquiteeasytodemonstratethattheefficienciesofallreversibleenginesoperatingbetweenthesamereservoirsare
equal. Supposethat DandEare bothreversible engines. Ifthey are coupled asshowninFigure 4.10(b),the efficiency
ofEcannotbegreaterthantheefficiencyofD,orthesecondlawwouldbeviolated.Ifbothenginesarethenreversed,the
samereasoningimpliesthattheefficiencyofDcannotbegreaterthantheefficiencyofE.Combiningtheseresultsleadsto
the conclusion that all reversible engines working between the same two reservoirs have the same efficiency.
4.1 CheckYourUnderstandingWhatistheefficiencyofaperfectheatengine?Whatisthecoefficientof
performance of a perfect refrigerator?
4.2 Check Your Understanding Show that Q
h
−Q′
h
=Q c−Q′
c
for the hypothetical engine of Figure
4.10(b).
4.5 | The Carnot Cycle
Learning Objectives
• Describe the Carnot cycle with the roles of all four processes involved
• Outline the Carnot principle and its implications
• Demonstrate the equivalence of the Carnot principle and the second law of thermodynamics
Intheearly1820s,SadiCarnot(1786−1832),aFrenchengineer,becameinterestedinimprovingtheefficienciesofpractical
heat engines. In 1824, his studies led him to propose a hypothetical working cycle with the highest possible efficiency
between the same two reservoirs, known now as the Carnot cycle. An engine operating in this cycle is called a Carnot
engine. The Carnot cycle is of special importance for a variety of reasons. At a practical level, this cycle represents a
reversible model for the steam power plant and the refrigerator or heat pump. Yet, it is also very important theoretically,
foritplaysamajorroleinthedevelopmentofanotherimportantstatementofthesecondlawofthermodynamics.Finally,
becauseonlytworeservoirsareinvolvedinitsoperation,itcanbeusedalongwiththesecondlawofthermodynamicsto
define an absolute temperature scale that is truly independent of any substance used for temperature measurement.
With an ideal gas as the working substance, the steps of the Carnot cycle, as represented byFigure 4.11, are as follows.
1. Isothermal expansion. The gas is placed in thermal contact with a heat reservoir at a temperature T . The gas
h
absorbs heat Q from the heat reservoir and is allowed to expand isothermally, doing work W . Because the
h 1
internalenergy E ofanidealgasisafunctionofthetemperatureonly,thechangeoftheinternalenergyiszero,
int
thatis, ΔE =0 duringthisisothermalexpansion.Withthefirstlawofthermodynamics, ΔE =Q−W, we
int int
find that the heat absorbed by the gas is
V
Q =W =nRT ln N .
h 1 h V
M

156 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Figure 4.11 The four processes of the Carnot cycle. The working substance is assumed to be an
ideal gas whose thermodynamic pathMNOPis represented inFigure 4.12.
Figure 4.12 The total work done by the gas in the Carnot cycle
is shown and given by the area enclosed by the loopMNOPM.
2. Adiabatic expansion.The gas is thermally isolated and allowed to expand further,doing work W . Because this
2
expansionisadiabatic,thetemperatureofthegasfalls—inthiscase,from T
h
toT c. From pVγ = constant and
the equation of state for an ideal gas, pV =nRT, we have
γ−1
TV =constant,
so that
γ−1 γ−1
T h V N =T c V O .
3. Isothermal compression. The gas is placed in thermal contact with a cold reservoir at temperature T and
c
compressed isothermally. During this process, work W is done on the gas and it gives up heat Q to the cold
3 c
reservoir. The reasoning used in step 1 now yields
V
Q c=nRT c ln V O ,
P
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9