# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 684-692
############################################################

672 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.17 (a) A hydraulic jack operates by applying forces to an incompressible fluid in a U-tube, using a movable piston
on each side of the tube. (b) Hydraulic jacks are commonly used by car mechanics to lift vehicles so that repairs and maintenance
can be performed. (credit b: modification of work by Jane Whitney)
From Pascal’s principle, it can be shown that the force needed to lift the car is less than the weight of the car:
where is the force applied to lift the car, is the cross-sectional area of the smaller piston, is the cross
sectional area of the larger piston, and is the weight of the car.
EXAMPLE 14.3
Calculating Force on Wheel Cylinders: Pascal Puts on the Brakes
Consider the automobile hydraulic system shown in Figure 14.18. Suppose a force of 100 N is applied to the brake
pedal, which acts on the pedal cylinder (acting as a “master” cylinder) through a lever. A force of 500 N is exerted on
the pedal cylinder. Pressure created in the pedal cylinder is transmitted to the four wheel cylinders. The pedal
cylinder has a diameter of 0.500 cm and each wheel cylinder has a diameter of 2.50 cm. Calculate the magnitude of
the force created at each of the wheel cylinders.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.3 • Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics 673
FIGURE 14.18 Hydraulic brakes use Pascal’s principle. The driver pushes the brake pedal, exerting a force that is increased by the simple
lever and again by the hydraulic system. Each of the identical wheel cylinders receives the same pressure and, therefore, creates the same
force output . The circular cross-sectional areas of the pedal and wheel cylinders are represented by and , respectively.
Strategy
We are given the force applied to the pedal cylinder. The cross-sectional areas and can be calculated
from their given diameters. Then we can use the following relationship to find the force :
Manipulate this algebraically to get on one side and substitute known values.
Solution
Pascal’s principle applied to hydraulic systems is given by
Significance
This value is the force exerted by each of the four wheel cylinders. Note that we can add as many wheel cylinders as
we wish. If each has a 2.50-cm diameter, each will exert A simple hydraulic system, as an example
of a simple machine, can increase force but cannot do more work than is done on it. Work is force times distance
moved, and the wheel cylinder moves through a smaller distance than the pedal cylinder. Furthermore, the more
wheels added, the smaller the distance each one moves. Many hydraulic systems—such as power brakes and those
in bulldozers—have a motorized pump that actually does most of the work in the system.

674 14 • Fluid Mechanics
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.3
Would a hydraulic press still operate properly if a gas is used instead of a liquid?
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define buoyant force
• State Archimedes’ principle
• Describe the relationship between density and Archimedes’ principle
When placed in a fluid, some objects float due to a buoyant force. Where does this buoyant force come from? Why is
it that some things float and others do not? Do objects that sink get any support at all from the fluid? Is your body
buoyed by the atmosphere, or are only helium balloons affected (Figure 14.19)?
FIGURE 14.19 (a) Even objects that sink, like this anchor, are partly supported by water when submerged. (b) Submarines have adjustable
density (ballast tanks) so that they may float or sink as desired. (c) Helium-filled balloons tug upward on their strings, demonstrating air’s
buoyant effect. (credit b: modification of work by Allied Navy; credit c: modification of work by “Crystl”/Flickr)
Answers to all these questions, and many others, are based on the fact that pressure increases with depth in a fluid.
This means that the upward force on the bottom of an object in a fluid is greater than the downward force on top of
the object. There is an upward force, or buoyant force, on any object in any fluid (Figure 14.20). If the buoyant force
is greater than the object’s weight, the net force on the object is upward. If we release such an object, it will rise in
the fluid. If the buoyant force is less than the object’s weight, the object sinks when released. If the buoyant force
equals the object’s weight, the object can remain suspended at its present depth, either immersed in the fluid (as
for a neutrally buoyant diver) or partly above the surface (as with a floating object.) If the buoyant force equals the
object’s weight, the object can remain suspended at its present depth. The buoyant force is always present, whether
the object floats, sinks, or is suspended in a fluid.
BUOYANT FORCE
The buoyant force is the upward force on any object in any fluid.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.4 • Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy 675
FIGURE 14.20 Pressure due to the weight of a fluid increases with depth because . This change in pressure and associated upward
force on the bottom of the cylinder are greater than the downward force on the top of the cylinder. The differences in the force results in the
buoyant force . (Horizontal forces cancel.)
Archimedes’ Principle
Just how large a force is buoyant force? To answer this question, think about what happens when a submerged
object is removed from a fluid, as in Figure 14.21. If the object were not in the fluid, the space the object occupied
would be filled by fluid having a weight This weight is supported by the surrounding fluid, so the buoyant force
must equal the weight of the fluid displaced by the object.
ARCHIMEDES’ PRINCIPLE
The buoyant force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it displaces. In equation form, Archimedes’
principle is
where is the buoyant force and is the weight of the fluid displaced by the object.
This principle is named after the Greek mathematician and inventor Archimedes (ca. 287–212 BCE), who stated this
principle long before concepts of force were well established.
FIGURE 14.21 (a) An object submerged in a fluid experiences a buoyant force If is greater than the weight of the object, the object
rises. If is less than the weight of the object, the object sinks. (b) If the object is removed, it is replaced by fluid having weight Since
this weight is supported by surrounding fluid, the buoyant force must equal the weight of the fluid displaced.

676 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Archimedes’ principle refers to the force of buoyancy that results when a body is submerged in a fluid, whether
partially or wholly. The force that provides the pressure of a fluid acts on a body perpendicular to the surface of the
body. In other words, the force due to the pressure at the bottom is pointed up, while at the top, the force due to the
pressure is pointed down; the forces due to the pressures at the sides are pointing into the body.
Since the bottom of the body is at a greater depth than the top of the body, the pressure at the lower part of the
body is higher than the pressure at the upper part, as shown in Figure 14.20. Therefore a net upward force acts on
the body. This upward force is the force of buoyancy, or simply buoyancy.
INTERACTIVE
The exclamation “Eureka” (meaning “I found it”) has often been credited to Archimedes as he made the discovery
that would lead to Archimedes’ principle. Some say it all started in a bathtub. To hear this story, watch this video
(https://openstax.org/l/21archNASA) or explore Scientific American (https://openstax.org/l/21archsciamer) to learn
more.
Density and Archimedes’ Principle
If you drop a lump of clay in water, it will sink. But if you mold the same lump of clay into the shape of a boat, it will
float. Because of its shape, the clay boat displaces more water than the lump and experiences a greater buoyant
force, even though its mass is the same. The same is true of steel ships.
The average density of an object is what ultimately determines whether it floats. If an object’s average density is
less than that of the surrounding fluid, it will float. The reason is that the fluid, having a higher density, contains
more mass and hence more weight in the same volume. The buoyant force, which equals the weight of the fluid
displaced, is thus greater than the weight of the object. Likewise, an object denser than the fluid will sink.
The extent to which a floating object is submerged depends on how the object’s density compares to the density of
the fluid. In Figure 14.22, for example, the unloaded ship has a lower density and less of it is submerged compared
with the same ship when loaded. We can derive a quantitative expression for the fraction submerged by considering
density. The fraction submerged is the ratio of the volume submerged to the volume of the object, or
The volume submerged equals the volume of fluid displaced, which we call . Now we can obtain the relationship
between the densities by substituting into the expression. This gives
where is the average density of the object and is the density of the fluid. Since the object floats, its mass and
that of the displaced fluid are equal, so they cancel from the equation, leaving
We can use this relationship to measure densities.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.4 • Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy 677
FIGURE 14.22 An unloaded ship (a) floats higher in the water than a loaded ship (b).
EXAMPLE 14.4
Calculating Average Density
Suppose a 60.0-kg woman floats in fresh water with 97.0% of her volume submerged when her lungs are full of air.
What is her average density?
Strategy
We can find the woman’s density by solving the equation
for the density of the object. This yields
We know both the fraction submerged and the density of water, so we can calculate the woman’s density.
Solution
Entering the known values into the expression for her density, we obtain
Significance
The woman’s density is less than the fluid density. We expect this because she floats.
Numerous lower-density objects or substances float in higher-density fluids: oil on water, a hot-air balloon in the
atmosphere, a bit of cork in wine, an iceberg in salt water, and hot wax in a “lava lamp,” to name a few. A less
obvious example is mountain ranges floating on the higher-density crust and mantle beneath them. Even seemingly
solid Earth has fluid characteristics.
Measuring Density
One of the most common techniques for determining density is shown in Figure 14.23.

678 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.23 (a) A coin is weighed in air. (b) The apparent weight of the coin is determined while it is completely submerged in a fluid of
known density. These two measurements are used to calculate the density of the coin.
An object, here a coin, is weighed in air and then weighed again while submerged in a liquid. The density of the coin,
an indication of its authenticity, can be calculated if the fluid density is known. We can use this same technique to
determine the density of the fluid if the density of the coin is known.
All of these calculations are based on Archimedes’ principle, which states that the buoyant force on the object
equals the weight of the fluid displaced. This, in turn, means that the object appears to weigh less when submerged;
we call this measurement the object’s apparent weight. The object suffers an apparent weight loss equal to the
weight of the fluid displaced. Alternatively, on balances that measure mass, the object suffers an apparent mass
loss equal to the mass of fluid displaced. That is, apparent weight loss equals weight of fluid displaced, or apparent
mass loss equals mass of fluid displaced.
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the characteristics of flow
• Calculate flow rate
• Describe the relationship between flow rate and velocity
• Explain the consequences of the equation of continuity to the conservation of mass
The first part of this chapter dealt with fluid statics, the study of fluids at rest. The rest of this chapter deals with
fluid dynamics, the study of fluids in motion. Even the most basic forms of fluid motion can be quite complex. For
this reason, we limit our investigation to ideal fluids in many of the examples. An ideal fluid is a fluid with negligible
viscosity. Viscosity is a measure of the internal friction in a fluid; we examine it in more detail in Viscosity and
Turbulence. In a few examples, we examine an incompressible fluid—one for which an extremely large force is
required to change the volume—since the density in an incompressible fluid is constant throughout.
Characteristics of Flow
Velocity vectors are often used to illustrate fluid motion in applications like meteorology. For example, wind—the
fluid motion of air in the atmosphere—can be represented by vectors indicating the speed and direction of the wind
at any given point on a map. Figure 14.24 shows velocity vectors describing the winds during Hurricane Arthur in
2014.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.5 • Fluid Dynamics 679
FIGURE 14.24 The velocity vectors show the flow of wind in Hurricane Arthur. Notice the circulation of the wind around the eye of the
hurricane. Wind speeds are highest near the eye. The colors represent the relative vorticity, a measure of turning or spinning of the air.
(credit: modification of work by Joseph Trout, Stockton University)
Another method for representing fluid motion is a streamline. A streamline represents the path of a small volume of
fluid as it flows. The velocity is always tangential to the streamline. The diagrams in Figure 14.25 use streamlines to
illustrate two examples of fluids moving through a pipe. The first fluid exhibits a laminar flow (sometimes described
as a steady flow), represented by smooth, parallel streamlines. Note that in the example shown in part (a), the
velocity of the fluid is greatest in the center and decreases near the walls of the pipe due to the viscosity of the fluid
and friction between the pipe walls and the fluid. This is a special case of laminar flow, where the friction between
the pipe and the fluid is high, known as no slip boundary conditions. The second diagram represents turbulent flow,
in which streamlines are irregular and change over time. In turbulent flow, the paths of the fluid flow are irregular as
different parts of the fluid mix together or form small circular regions that resemble whirlpools. This can occur when
the speed of the fluid reaches a certain critical speed.
FIGURE 14.25 (a) Laminar flow can be thought of as layers of fluid moving in parallel, regular paths. (b) In turbulent flow, regions of fluid
move in irregular, colliding paths, resulting in mixing and swirling.
Flow Rate and its Relation to Velocity
The volume of fluid passing by a given location through an area during a period of time is called flow rate Q, or more
precisely, volume flow rate. In symbols, this is written as
14.13