# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 306-311
############################################################

294 6 • Chapter Review
magnitude oppose the motion. For larger objects (such as a
baseball) moving at a velocity in air, the drag
force is determined using the drag coefficient
• Rotating and accelerated frames of reference are
(typical values are given in Table 6.2), the area of
noninertial. Inertial forces, such as the Coriolis
the object facing the fluid, and the fluid density.
force, are needed to explain motion in such
• For small objects (such as a bacterium) moving in
frames.
a denser medium (such as water), the drag force
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed is given by Stokes’ law.
• Drag forces acting on an object moving in a fluid
Conceptual Questions
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 7 . Define centripetal force. Can any type of force
(for example, tension, gravitational force,
1 . To simulate the apparent weightlessness of
friction, and so on) be a centripetal force? Can
space orbit, astronauts are trained in the hold of
any combination of forces be a centripetal force?
a cargo aircraft that is accelerating downward at
g. Why do they appear to be weightless, as 8 . If centripetal force is directed toward the center,
measured by standing on a bathroom scale, in why do you feel that you are ‘thrown’ away from
this accelerated frame of reference? Is there any the center as a car goes around a curve? Explain.
difference between their apparent
9 . Race car drivers routinely cut corners, as shown
weightlessness in orbit and in the aircraft?
below (Path 2). Explain how this allows the
6.2 Friction curve to be taken at the greatest speed.
2 . The glue on a piece of tape can exert forces. Can
these forces be a type of simple friction?
Explain, considering especially that tape can
stick to vertical walls and even to ceilings.
3 . When you learn to drive, you discover that you
need to let up slightly on the brake pedal as you
come to a stop or the car will stop with a jerk.
Explain this in terms of the relationship between
static and kinetic friction.
4 . When you push a piece of chalk across a
chalkboard, it sometimes screeches because it
rapidly alternates between slipping and sticking
to the board. Describe this process in more
detail, in particular, explaining how it is related
to the fact that kinetic friction is less than static
friction. (The same slip-grab process occurs
when tires screech on pavement.)
5 . A physics major is cooking breakfast when she
notices that the frictional force between her
10 . Many amusement parks have rides that make
steel spatula and Teflon frying pan is only 0.200
vertical loops like the one shown below. For
N. Knowing the coefficient of kinetic friction
safety, the cars are attached to the rails in such a
between the two materials, she quickly
way that they cannot fall off. If the car goes over
calculates the normal force. What is it?
the top at just the right speed, gravity alone will
6.3 Centripetal Force supply the centripetal force. What other force
acts and what is its direction if:
6 . If you wish to reduce the stress (which is related
(a) The car goes over the top at faster than this
to centripetal force) on high-speed tires, would
speed?
you use large- or small-diameter tires? Explain.
(b) The car goes over the top at slower than this
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 295
speed? your car’s speed? What is the direction of the
force exerted on you by the car seat?
15 . Suppose a mass is moving in a circular path on a
frictionless table as shown below. In Earth’s frame
of reference, there is no centrifugal force pulling the
mass away from the center of rotation, yet there is a
force stretching the string attaching the mass to the
nail. Using concepts related to centripetal force and
Newton’s third law, explain what force stretches the
string, identifying its physical origin.
11 . What causes water to be removed from clothes
in a spin-dryer?
12 . As a skater forms a circle, what force is
responsible for making his turn? Use a free-body
diagram in your answer.
13 . Suppose a child is riding on a merry-go-round at a
distance about halfway between its center and edge.
16 . When a toilet is flushed or a sink is drained, the
She has a lunch box resting on wax paper, so that
water (and other material) begins to rotate about
there is very little friction between it and the merry-
the drain on the way down. Assuming no initial
go-round. (a) Which path shown below, as viewed
rotation and a flow initially directly straight
from the ground, will the lunch box take when she
toward the drain, explain what causes the
lets go? (b) The lunch box leaves a trail in the dust
rotation and which direction it has in the
on the merry-go-round. What is the shape of the
Northern Hemisphere. (Note that this is a small
dust trail? Explain your answers.
effect and in most toilets the rotation is caused
by directional water jets.) Would the direction of
rotation reverse if water were forced up the
drain?
17 . A car rounds a curve and encounters a patch of
ice with a very low coefficient of kinetic fiction.
The car slides off the road. Describe the path of
the car as it leaves the road.
18 . In one amusement park ride, riders enter a large
vertical barrel and stand against the wall on its
horizontal floor. The barrel is spun up and the
floor drops away. Riders feel as if they are
pinned to the wall by a force something like the
gravitational force. This is an inertial force
sensed and used by the riders to explain events
in the rotating frame of reference of the barrel.
Explain in an inertial frame of reference (Earth is
14 . Do you feel yourself thrown to either side when
nearly one) what pins the riders to the wall, and
you negotiate a curve that is ideally banked for
identify all forces acting on them.

296 6 • Chapter Review
19 . Two friends are having a conversation. Anna 22 . Two expressions were used for the drag force
says a satellite in orbit is in free fall because the experienced by a moving object in a liquid. One
satellite keeps falling toward Earth. Tom says a depended upon the speed, while the other was
satellite in orbit is not in free fall because the proportional to the square of the speed. In
acceleration due to gravity is not . Who which types of motion would each of these
do you agree with and why? expressions be more applicable than the other
one?
20 . A nonrotating frame of reference placed at the
center of the Sun is very nearly an inertial one. 23 . As cars travel, oil and gasoline leaks onto the
Why is it not exactly an inertial frame? road surface. If a light rain falls, what does this
do to the control of the car? Does a heavy rain
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
make any difference?
21 . Athletes such as swimmers and bicyclists wear
24 . Why can a squirrel jump from a tree branch to
body suits in competition. Formulate a list of
the ground and run away undamaged, while a
pros and cons of such suits.
human could break a bone in such a fall?
Problems
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws Two of the forces are
and Find
25 . A 30.0-kg girl in a swing is pushed to one side
the third force.
and held at rest by a horizontal force so that
the swing ropes are with respect to the 28 . A flea jumps by exerting a force of
vertical. (a) Calculate the tension in each of the straight down on the ground. A
two ropes supporting the swing under these breeze blowing on the flea parallel to the ground
conditions. (b) Calculate the magnitude of exerts a force of on the flea
while the flea is still in contact with the ground.
26 . Find the tension in each of the three cables
Find the direction and magnitude of the
supporting the traffic light if it weighs 2.00 × 102
acceleration of the flea if its mass is
N.
. Do not neglect the
gravitational force.
29 . Two muscles in the back of the leg pull upward on
the Achilles tendon, as shown below. (These
muscles are called the medial and lateral heads of
the gastrocnemius muscle.) Find the magnitude and
direction of the total force on the Achilles tendon.
What type of movement could be caused by this
force?
27 . Three forces act on an object, considered to be a
particle, which moves with constant velocity
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 297
33 . A large rocket has a mass of at
takeoff, and its engines produce a thrust of
(a) Find its initial acceleration if
it takes off vertically. (b) How long does it take to
reach a velocity of 120 km/h straight up,
assuming constant mass and thrust?
34 . A basketball player jumps straight up for a ball.
To do this, he lowers his body 0.300 m and then
accelerates through this distance by forcefully
straightening his legs. This player leaves the
floor with a vertical velocity sufficient to carry
him 0.900 m above the floor. (a) Calculate his
velocity when he leaves the floor. (b) Calculate
his acceleration while he is straightening his
legs. He goes from zero to the velocity found in
(a) in a distance of 0.300 m. (c) Calculate the
force he exerts on the floor to do this, given that
30 . After a mishap, a 76.0-kg circus performer clings to his mass is 110.0 kg.
a trapeze, which is being pulled to the side by
35 . A 2.50-kg fireworks shell is fired straight up from
another circus artist, as shown here. Calculate the
a mortar and reaches a height of 110.0 m. (a)
tension in the two ropes if the person is momentarily
Neglecting air resistance (a poor assumption,
motionless. Include a free-body diagram in your
but we will make it for this example), calculate
solution.
the shell’s velocity when it leaves the mortar. (b)
The mortar itself is a tube 0.450 m long.
Calculate the average acceleration of the shell in
the tube as it goes from zero to the velocity
found in (a). (c) What is the average force on the
shell in the mortar? Express your answer in
newtons and as a ratio to the weight of the shell.
36 . A 0.500-kg potato is fired at an angle of
above the horizontal from a PVC pipe used as a
“potato gun” and reaches a height of 110.0 m.
(a) Neglecting air resistance, calculate the
potato’s velocity when it leaves the gun. (b) The
gun itself is a tube 0.450 m long. Calculate the
average acceleration of the potato in the tube as
it goes from zero to the velocity found in (a). (c)
What is the average force on the potato in the
gun? Express your answer in newtons and as a
ratio to the weight of the potato.
37 . An elevator filled with passengers has a mass of
31 . A 35.0-kg dolphin accelerates opposite to the . (a) The elevator accelerates
motion from 12.0 to 7.50 m/s in 2.30 s to join upward from rest at a rate of for 1.50
another dolphin in play. What average force was s. Calculate the tension in the cable supporting
exerted to slow the first dolphin if it was moving the elevator. (b) The elevator continues upward
horizontally? (The gravitational force is balanced at constant velocity for 8.50 s. What is the
by the buoyant force of the water.) tension in the cable during this time? (c) The
elevator accelerates opposite to the motion at a
32 . When starting a foot race, a 70.0-kg sprinter
rate of for 3.00 s. What is the tension
exerts an average force of 650 N backward on
in the cable during acceleration opposite to the
the ground for 0.800 s. (a) What is their final
motion? (d) How high has the elevator moved
speed? (b) How far do they travel?

298 6 • Chapter Review
above its original starting point, and what is its
final velocity?
38 . A 20.0-g ball hangs from the roof of a freight car
by a string. When the freight car begins to move,
the string makes an angle of with the
vertical. (a) What is the acceleration of the
freight car? (b) What is the tension in the string?
39 . A student’s backpack, full of textbooks, is hung
from a spring scale attached to the ceiling of an
elevator. When the elevator is accelerating
downward at , the scale reads 60 N. (a)
What is the mass of the backpack? (b) What
does the scale read if the elevator moves
upward while speeding up at a rate ? (c)
What does the scale read if the elevator moves
upward at constant velocity? (d) If the elevator
had no brakes and the cable supporting it were
to break loose so that the elevator could fall
43 . Two blocks are connected by a massless rope as
freely, what would the spring scale read?
shown below. The mass of the block on the table is
40 . A service elevator takes a load of garbage, mass 4.0 kg and the hanging mass is 1.0 kg. The table
10.0 kg, from a floor of a skyscraper under and the pulley are frictionless. (a) Find the
construction, down to ground level, accelerating acceleration of the system. (b) Find the tension in
downward at a rate of . Find the the rope. (c) Find the speed with which the hanging
magnitude of the force the garbage exerts on the mass hits the floor if it starts from rest and is
floor of the service elevator? initially located 1.0 m from the floor.
41 . A roller coaster car starts from rest at the top of
a track 30.0 m long and inclined at to the
horizontal. Assume that friction can be ignored.
(a) What is the acceleration of the car? (b) How
much time elapses before it reaches the bottom
of the track?
42 . The device shown below is the Atwood’s
machine considered in Example 6.5. Assuming
that the masses of the string and the frictionless
pulley are negligible, (a) find an equation for the
acceleration of the two blocks; (b) find an
equation for the tension in the string; and (c) find
both the acceleration and tension when block 1
has mass 2.00 kg and block 2 has mass 4.00 kg. 44 . Shown below are two carts connected by a cord
that passes over a small frictionless pulley. Each
cart rolls freely with negligible friction. Calculate
the acceleration of the carts and the tension in
the cord.
Access for free at openstax.org