# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 470-477
############################################################

458 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
b. Here the angular velocity decreases from 26.2 rad/s (250 rpm) to zero, so that is −26.2 rad/s, and is
given to be –87.3 . Thus,
Significance
Note that the angular acceleration as the mechanic spins the wheel is small and positive; it takes 5 s to produce an
appreciable angular velocity. When she hits the brake, the angular acceleration is large and negative. The angular
velocity quickly goes to zero.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.1
The fan blades on a turbofan jet engine (shown below) accelerate from rest up to a rotation rate of 40.0 rev/s in 20
s. The increase in angular velocity of the fan is constant in time. (The GE90-110B1 turbofan engine mounted on a
Boeing 777, as shown, is currently the largest turbofan engine in the world, capable of thrusts of 330–510 kN.)
(a) What is the average angular acceleration?
(b) What is the instantaneous angular acceleration at any time during the first 20 s?
FIGURE 10.9 (credit: “Bubinator”/ Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 10.3
Wind Turbine
A wind turbine (Figure 10.10) in a wind farm is being shut down for maintenance. It takes 30 s for the turbine to go
from its operating angular velocity to a complete stop in which the angular velocity function is
, where is the time in seconds. If the turbine is rotating counterclockwise
looking into the page, (a) what are the directions of the angular velocity and acceleration vectors? (b) What is the
average angular acceleration? (c) What is the instantaneous angular acceleration at
Access for free at openstax.org

10.1 • Rotational Variables 459
FIGURE 10.10 A wind turbine that is rotating counterclockwise, as seen head on.
Strategy
a. We are given the rotational sense of the turbine, which is counterclockwise in the plane of the page. Using the
right hand rule (Figure 10.5), we can establish the directions of the angular velocity and acceleration vectors.
b. We calculate the initial and final angular velocities to get the average angular acceleration. We establish the
sign of the angular acceleration from the results in (a).
c. We are given the functional form of the angular velocity, so we can find the functional form of the angular
acceleration function by taking its derivative with respect to time.
Solution
a. Since the turbine is rotating counterclockwise, angular velocity points out of the page. But since the angular
velocity is decreasing, the angular acceleration points into the page, in the opposite sense to the angular
velocity.
b. The initial angular velocity of the turbine, setting . The final angular velocity is zero, so
the average angular acceleration is
c. Taking the derivative of the angular velocity with respect to time gives
Significance
We found from the calculations in (a) and (b) that the angular acceleration and the average angular acceleration
are negative. The turbine has an angular acceleration in the opposite sense to its angular velocity.
We now have a basic vocabulary for discussing fixed-axis rotational kinematics and relationships between rotational
variables. We discuss more definitions and connections in the next section.

460 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive the kinematic equations for rotational motion with constant angular acceleration
• Select from the kinematic equations for rotational motion with constant angular acceleration the
appropriate equations to solve for unknowns in the analysis of systems undergoing fixed-axis rotation
• Use solutions found with the kinematic equations to verify the graphical analysis of fixed-axis rotation
with constant angular acceleration
In the preceding section, we defined the rotational variables of angular displacement, angular velocity, and angular
acceleration. In this section, we work with these definitions to derive relationships among these variables and use
these relationships to analyze rotational motion for a rigid body about a fixed axis under a constant angular
acceleration. This analysis forms the basis for rotational kinematics. If the angular acceleration is constant, the
equations of rotational kinematics simplify, similar to the equations of linear kinematics discussed in Motion along a
Straight Line and Motion in Two and Three Dimensions. We can then use this simplified set of equations to describe
many applications in physics and engineering where the angular acceleration of the system is constant. Rotational
kinematics is also a prerequisite to the discussion of rotational dynamics later in this chapter.
Kinematics of Rotational Motion
Using our intuition, we can begin to see how the rotational quantities , and t are related to one another. For
example, we saw in the preceding section that if a flywheel has an angular acceleration in the same direction as its
angular velocity vector, its angular velocity increases with time and its angular displacement also increases. On the
contrary, if the angular acceleration is opposite to the angular velocity vector, its angular velocity decreases with
time. We can describe these physical situations and many others with a consistent set of rotational kinematic
equations under a constant angular acceleration. The method to investigate rotational motion in this way is called
kinematics of rotational motion.
To begin, we note that if the system is rotating under a constant acceleration, then the average angular velocity
follows a simple relation because the angular velocity is increasing linearly with time. The average angular velocity is
just half the sum of the initial and final values:
10.9
From the definition of the average angular velocity, we can find an equation that relates the angular position,
average angular velocity, and time:
Solving for , we have
10.10
where we have set . This equation can be very useful if we know the average angular velocity of the system.
Then we could find the angular displacement over a given time period. Next, we find an equation relating , , and t.
To determine this equation, we start with the definition of angular acceleration:
We rearrange this to get and then we integrate both sides of this equation from initial values to final
values, that is, from to t and . In uniform rotational motion, the angular acceleration is constant so it can
be pulled out of the integral, yielding two definite integrals:
Access for free at openstax.org

10.2 • Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration 461
Setting , we have
We rearrange this to obtain
10.11
where is the initial angular velocity. Equation 10.11 is the rotational counterpart to the linear kinematics
equation . With Equation 10.11, we can find the angular velocity of an object at any specified time t
given the initial angular velocity and the angular acceleration.
Let’s now do a similar treatment starting with the equation . We rearrange it to obtain and
integrate both sides from initial to final values again, noting that the angular acceleration is constant and does not
have a time dependence. However, this time, the angular velocity is not constant (in general), so we substitute in
what we derived above:
where we have set . Now we rearrange to obtain
10.12
Equation 10.12 is the rotational counterpart to the linear kinematics equation found in Motion Along a Straight Line
for position as a function of time. This equation gives us the angular position of a rotating rigid body at any time t
given the initial conditions (initial angular position and initial angular velocity) and the angular acceleration.
We can find an equation that is independent of time by solving for t in Equation 10.11 and substituting into Equation
10.12. Equation 10.12 becomes
or
10.13
Equation 10.10 through Equation 10.13 describe fixed-axis rotation for constant acceleration and are summarized
in Table 10.1.

462 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
Angular displacement from average angular velocity
Angular velocity from angular acceleration
Angular displacement from angular velocity and angular acceleration
Angular velocity from angular displacement and angular acceleration
TABLE 10.1 Kinematic Equations
Applying the Equations for Rotational Motion
Now we can apply the key kinematic relations for rotational motion to some simple examples to get a feel for how
the equations can be applied to everyday situations.
EXAMPLE 10.4
Calculating the Acceleration of a Fishing Reel
A deep-sea fisherman hooks a big fish that swims away from the boat, pulling the fishing line from his fishing reel.
The whole system is initially at rest, and the fishing line unwinds from the reel at a radius of 4.50 cm from its axis of
rotation. The reel is given an angular acceleration of for 2.00 s (Figure 10.11).
(a) What is the final angular velocity of the reel after 2 s?
(b) How many revolutions does the reel make?
FIGURE 10.11 Fishing line coming off a rotating reel moves linearly.
Strategy
Identify the knowns and compare with the kinematic equations for constant acceleration. Look for the appropriate
equation that can be solved for the unknown, using the knowns given in the problem description.
Solution
a. We are given and t and want to determine . The most straightforward equation to use is ,
since all terms are known besides the unknown variable we are looking for. We are given that (it starts
from rest), so
b. We are asked to find the number of revolutions. Because , we can find the number of
revolutions by finding in radians. We are given and t, and we know is zero, so we can obtain by using
Access for free at openstax.org

10.2 • Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration 463
Converting radians to revolutions gives
Significance
This example illustrates that relationships among rotational quantities are highly analogous to those among linear
quantities. The answers to the questions are realistic. After unwinding for two seconds, the reel is found to spin at
220 rad/s, which is 2100 rpm. (No wonder reels sometimes make high-pitched sounds.)
In the preceding example, we considered a fishing reel with a positive angular acceleration. Now let us consider
what happens with a negative angular acceleration.
EXAMPLE 10.5
Calculating the Duration When the Fishing Reel Slows Down and Stops
Now the fisherman applies a brake to the spinning reel, achieving an angular acceleration of . How long
does it take the reel to come to a stop?
Strategy
We are asked to find the time t for the reel to come to a stop. The initial and final conditions are different from those
in the previous problem, which involved the same fishing reel. Now we see that the initial angular velocity is
and the final angular velocity is zero. The angular acceleration is given as
Examining the available equations, we see all quantities but t are known in , making it easiest to use
this equation.
Solution
The equation states
We solve the equation algebraically for t and then substitute the known values as usual, yielding
Significance
Note that care must be taken with the signs that indicate the directions of various quantities. Also, note that the time
to stop the reel is fairly small because the acceleration is rather large. Fishing lines sometimes snap because of the
accelerations involved, and fishermen often let the fish swim for a while before applying brakes on the reel. A tired
fish is slower, requiring a smaller acceleration.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.2
A centrifuge used in DNA extraction spins at a maximum rate of 7000 rpm, producing a “g-force” on the sample that
is 6000 times the force of gravity. If the centrifuge takes 10 seconds to come to rest from the maximum spin rate:
(a) What is the angular acceleration of the centrifuge? (b) What is the angular displacement of the centrifuge during
this time?

464 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
EXAMPLE 10.6
Angular Acceleration of a Propeller
Figure 10.12 shows a graph of the angular velocity of a propeller on an aircraft as a function of time. Its angular
velocity starts at 30 rad/s and drops linearly to 0 rad/s over the course of 5 seconds. (a) Find the angular
acceleration of the object and verify the result using the kinematic equations. (b) Find the angle through which the
propeller rotates during these 5 seconds and verify your result using the kinematic equations.
FIGURE 10.12 A graph of the angular velocity of a propeller versus time.
Strategy
a. Since the angular velocity varies linearly with time, we know that the angular acceleration is constant and
does not depend on the time variable. The angular acceleration is the slope of the angular velocity vs. time
graph, . To calculate the slope, we read directly from Figure 10.12, and see that at
and at . Then, we can verify the result using .
b. We use the equation since the time derivative of the angle is the angular velocity, we can find the
angular displacement by integrating the angular velocity, which from the figure means taking the area under
the angular velocity graph. In other words:
Then we use the kinematic equations for constant acceleration to verify the result.
Solution
a. Calculating the slope, we get
We see that this is exactly Equation 10.11 with a little rearranging of terms.
b. We can find the area under the curve by calculating the area of the right triangle, as shown in Figure 10.13.
Access for free at openstax.org