# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 103-111
############################################################

2 • Chapter Review 91
.
58 . Find the unit vector of direction for the following
vector quantities: (a) Force ,
(b) displacement , and (c)
velocity .
59 . At one point in space, the direction of the
electric field vector is given in the Cartesian
system by the unit vector
. If the magnitude of the
electric field vector is E = 400.0 V/m, what are
the scalar components , , and of the
electric field vector at this point? What is the
direction angle of the electric field vector at
this point?
60 . A barge is pulled by the two tugboats shown in the
following figure. One tugboat pulls on the barge with
FIGURE 2.33 a force of magnitude 4000 units of force at
above the line AB (see the figure) and the other
53 . Given the vectors in the preceding figure, find tugboat pulls on the barge with a force of magnitude
vector that solves equations (a) 5000 units of force at below the line AB. Resolve
and (b) . Assume the +x-axis the pulling forces to their scalar components and
is horizontal to the right. find the components of the resultant force pulling on
the barge. What is the magnitude of the resultant
54 . A delivery driver starts at the post office, drives
pull? What is its direction relative to the line AB?
40 km north, then 20 km west, then 60 km
northeast, and finally 50 km north to stop for
lunch. Use the analytical method to determine
the following: (a) Find his net displacement
vector. (b) How far is the restaurant from the
post office? (c) If he returns directly from the
restaurant to the post office, what is his
displacement vector on the return trip? (d) What
is his compass heading on the return trip?
Assume the +x-axis is to the east.
55 . An adventurous dog strays from home, runs
three blocks east, two blocks north, and one
block east, one block north, and two blocks
west. Assuming that each block is about a 100
yd, use the analytical method to find the dog’s
net displacement vector, its magnitude, and its
direction. Assume the +x-axis is to the east. How
would your answer be affected if each block was
about 100 m?
56 . If ,
, and
, find the unknown
constants a and b such that .
57 . Given the displacement vector
find the displacement vector so that

92 2 • Chapter Review
63 . Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right
for the vectors in the preceding figure, find (a)
the component of vector along vector , (b)
the component of vector along vector , (c)
the component of vector along vector , and
(d) the component of vector along vector .
64 . Find the angle between vectors for (a)
FIGURE 2.34
and
61 . In the control tower at a regional airport, an air and (b)
traffic controller monitors two aircraft that travel and
in straight paths directly away from the control
.
tower. One plane is a cargo carrier Boeing 747
climbing at above the horizontal, and 65 . Find the angles that vector
moving north of west. At some moment in makes with the x-, y-,
time, the controller notes that the Boeing is at an and z- axes.
altitude of 2500 m and the DC-3 is at an altitude
66 . Show that the force vector
of 3000 m. The other plane is a Douglas DC-3
is orthogonal to the
climbing at above the horizontal, and cruising
directly west. (a) Find the position vectors of the force vector .
planes relative to the control tower at this time.
67 . Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right
(b) What is the distance between the planes at
for the vectors in the previous figure, find the
this time?
following vector products: (a) , (b)
2.4 Products of Vectors , (c) , (d) , (e)
62 . Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for , (f) , (g) , and (h)
the vectors in the following figure, find the following .
scalar products: (a) , (b) , (c) , (d)
68 . Find the cross product for (a)
, (e) , (f) , (g) , and
and
(h) .
, (b)
and
Access for free at openstax.org

2 • Chapter Review 93
, (c) and .
, and (d)
70 . (a) If , can we conclude
and .
? (b) If , can we conclude
69 . For the vectors in the earlier figure, find (a) ? (c) If , can we conclude
, (b) , and (c) ? Why or why not?
Additional Problems
71 . You fly in a straight line in still air in the angle between vectors and .
direction south of west. (a) Find the
78 . Four force vectors each have the same
distances you would have to fly due south and
magnitude f. What is the largest magnitude the
then due west to arrive at the same point. (b)
resultant force vector may have when these
Find the distances you would have to fly first in a
forces are added? What is the smallest
direction south of west and then in a
magnitude of the resultant? Make a graph of
direction west of north. Note these are the
both situations.
components of the displacement along a
different set of axes—namely, the one rotated by 79 . A skater glides along a circular path of radius
with respect to the axes in (a). 5.00 m in clockwise direction. When he coasts
around one-half of the circle, starting from the
72 . Rectangular coordinates of a point are given by
west point, find (a) the magnitude of his
(2, y) and its polar coordinates are given by
displacement vector and (b) how far he actually
. Find y and r.
skated. (c) What is the magnitude of his
73 . If the polar coordinates of a point are and displacement vector when he skates all the way
its rectangular coordinates are , determine around the circle and comes back to the west
the polar coordinates of the following points: (a) point?
(−x, y), (b) (−2x, −2y), and (c) (3x, −3y).
80 . A stubborn dog is being walked on a leash by its
74 . Vectors and have identical magnitudes of owner. At one point, the dog encounters an
5.0 units. Find the angle between them if interesting scent at some spot on the ground
. and wants to explore it in detail, but the owner
gets impatient and pulls on the leash with force
75 . Starting at the island of Moi in an unknown
along the
archipelago, a fishing boat makes a round trip
leash. (a) What is the magnitude of the pulling
with two stops at the islands of Noi and Poi. It
force? (b) What angle does the leash make with
sails from Moi for 4.76 nautical miles (nmi) in a
the vertical?
direction north of east to Noi. From Noi, it
sails west of north to Poi. On its return leg 81 . If the velocity vector of a polar bear is
from Poi, it sails east of south. What , how fast and in
distance does the boat sail between Noi and what geographic direction is it heading? Here,
Poi? What distance does it sail between Moi and and are directions to geographic east and
Poi? Express your answer both in nautical miles north, respectively.
and in kilometers. Note: 1 nmi = 1852 m.
82 . Find the scalar components of three-
76 . An air traffic controller notices two signals from
dimensional vectors and in the following
two planes on the radar monitor. One plane is at
figure and write the vectors in vector component
altitude 800 m and in a 19.2-km horizontal
form in terms of the unit vectors of the axes.
distance to the tower in a direction south of
west. The second plane is at altitude 1100 m
and its horizontal distance is 17.6 km and
south of west. What is the distance between
these planes?
77 . Show that when , then
, where is the

94 2 • Chapter Review
85 . Vectors and are two orthogonal vectors in
the xy-plane and they have identical
magnitudes. If , find .
86 . For the three-dimensional vectors in the
following figure, find (a) , (b) ,
and (c) .
83 . A diver explores a shallow reef off the coast of
Belize. She initially swims 90.0 m north, makes a
turn to the east and continues for 200.0 m, then
follows a big grouper for 80.0 m in the direction
north of east. In the meantime, a local
current displaces her by 150.0 m south.
Assuming the current is no longer present, in
what direction and how far should she now swim
87 . Show that is the volume of the
to come back to the point where she started?
parallelepiped, with edges formed by the three
84 . A force vector has x- and y-components, vectors in the following figure.
respectively, of −8.80 units of force and 15.00
units of force. The x- and y-components of force
vector are, respectively, 13.20 units of force
and −6.60 units of force. Find the components of
force vector that satisfies the vector equation
.
Access for free at openstax.org

2 • Chapter Review 95
Challenge Problems
88 . Vector is 5.0 cm long and vector is 4.0 cm (a) Show that, during the transformation of
long. Find the angle between these two vectors rotation, the coordinates in are expressed in
terms of the coordinates in S by the following
when .
relations:
89 . What is the component of the force vector
along the force
vector ? (b) Show that the distance of point P to the origin is
invariant under rotations of the coordinate system.
90 . The following figure shows a triangle formed by
Here, you have to show that
the three vectors , , and . If vector is
drawn between the midpoints of vectors and
, show that . (c) Show that the distance between points P and Q
is invariant under rotations of the coordinate
system. Here, you have to show that
91 . Distances between points in a plane do not change
when a coordinate system is rotated. In other
words, the magnitude of a vector is invariant under
rotations of the coordinate system. Suppose a
coordinate system S is rotated about its origin by
angle to become a new coordinate system , as
shown in the following figure. A point in a plane has
coordinates (x, y) in S and coordinates in
.

96 2 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 3
Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.1 A JR Central L0 series five-car maglev (magnetic levitation) train undergoing a test run on the Yamanashi Test Track. The
maglev train’s motion can be described using kinematics, the subject of this chapter. (credit: modification of work by “Maryland
GovPics”/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
3.5 Free Fall
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration
INTRODUCTION Our universe is full of objects in motion. From the stars, planets, and galaxies; to the motion of
people and animals; down to the microscopic scale of atoms and molecules—everything in our universe is in motion.
We can describe motion using the two disciplines of kinematics and dynamics. We study dynamics, which is
concerned with the causes of motion, in Newton’s Laws of Motion; but, there is much to be learned about motion
without referring to what causes it, and this is the study of kinematics. Kinematics involves describing motion
through properties such as position, time, velocity, and acceleration.
A full treatment of kinematics considers motion in two and three dimensions. For now, we discuss motion in one
dimension, which provides us with the tools necessary to study multidimensional motion. A good example of an
object undergoing one-dimensional motion is the maglev (magnetic levitation) train depicted at the beginning of this
chapter. As it travels, say, from Tokyo to Kyoto, it is at different positions along the track at various times in its
journey, and therefore has displacements, or changes in position. It also has a variety of velocities along its path and
it undergoes accelerations (changes in velocity). With the skills learned in this chapter we can calculate these
quantities and average velocity. All these quantities can be described using kinematics, without knowing the train’s
mass or the forces involved.

98 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define position, displacement, and distance traveled.
• Calculate the total displacement given the position as a function of time.
• Determine the total distance traveled.
• Calculate the average velocity given the displacement and elapsed time.
When you’re in motion, the basic questions to ask are: Where are you? Where are you going? How fast are you
getting there? The answers to these questions require that you specify your position, your displacement, and your
average velocity—the terms we define in this section.
Position
To describe the motion of an object, you must first be able to describe its position (x): where it is at any particular
time. More precisely, we need to specify its position relative to a convenient frame of reference. A frame of reference
is an arbitrary set of axes from which the position and motion of an object are described. Earth is often used as a
frame of reference, and we often describe the position of an object as it relates to stationary objects on Earth. For
example, a rocket launch could be described in terms of the position of the rocket with respect to Earth as a whole,
whereas a cyclist’s position could be described in terms of where she is in relation to the buildings she passes
Figure 3.2. In other cases, we use reference frames that are not stationary but are in motion relative to Earth. To
describe the position of a person in an airplane, for example, we use the airplane, not Earth, as the reference frame.
To describe the position of an object undergoing one-dimensional motion, we often use the variable x. Later in the
chapter, during the discussion of free fall, we use the variable y.
FIGURE 3.2 These cyclists in Vietnam can be described by their position relative to buildings or a canal. Their motion can be described by
their change in position, or displacement, in a frame of reference. (credit: modification of work by Suzan Black)
Displacement
If an object moves relative to a frame of reference—for example, if a professor moves to the right relative to a
whiteboard Figure 3.3—then the object’s position changes. This change in position is called displacement. The word
displacement implies that an object has moved, or has been displaced. Although position is the numerical value of x
along a straight line where an object might be located, displacement gives the change in position along this line.
Since displacement indicates direction, it is a vector and can be either positive or negative, depending on the choice
of positive direction. Also, an analysis of motion can have many displacements embedded in it. If right is positive
and an object moves 2 m to the right, then 4 m to the left, the individual displacements are 2 m and m,
respectively.
Access for free at openstax.org