# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 580-587
############################################################

568 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
joints such as the elbow. In the initial analysis of a problem, hinge joints should always be assumed to exert a force
in an arbitrary direction, and then you must solve for all components of a hinge force independently. In this example,
the elbow force happens to be vertical because the problem assumes the tension by the biceps to be vertical as
well. Such a simplification, however, is not a general rule.
Solution
Suppose we adopt a reference frame with the direction of the y-axis along the 50-lb weight and the pivot placed at
the elbow. In this frame, all three forces have only y-components, so we have only one equation for the first
equilibrium condition (for forces). We draw the free-body diagram for the forearm as shown in Figure 12.13,
indicating the pivot, the acting forces and their lever arms with respect to the pivot, and the angles and that
the forces and (respectively) make with their lever arms. In the definition of torque given by Equation 12.10,
the angle is the direction angle of the vector counted counterclockwise from the radial direction of the lever
arm that always points away from the pivot. By the same convention, the angle is measured counterclockwise
from the radial direction of the lever arm to the vector Done this way, the non-zero torques are most easily
computed by directly substituting into Equation 12.10 as follows:
FIGURE 12.13 Free-body diagram for the forearm for the equivalent solution. The pivot is located at point E (elbow).
The second equilibrium condition, can be now written as
12.26
From the free-body diagram, the first equilibrium condition (for forces) is
12.27
Equation 12.26 is identical to Equation 12.25 and gives the result Equation 12.27 gives
We see that these answers are identical to our previous answers, but the second choice for the frame of reference
leads to an equivalent solution that is simpler and quicker because it does not require that the forces be resolved
into their rectangular components.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.4
Repeat Example 12.4 assuming that the forearm is an object of uniform density that weighs 8.896 N.
Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 569
EXAMPLE 12.5
A Ladder Resting Against a Wall
A uniform ladder is long and weighs 400.0 N. The ladder rests against a slippery vertical wall, as shown
in Figure 12.14. The minimum inclination angle between the ladder and the rough floor below which the ladder slips
is Find the reaction forces from the floor and from the wall on the ladder and the coefficient of static
friction at the interface of the ladder with the floor that prevents the ladder from slipping.
FIGURE 12.14 A 5.0-m-long ladder rests against a frictionless wall.
Strategy
We can identify four forces acting on the ladder. The first force is the normal reaction force N from the floor in the
upward vertical direction. The second force is the static friction force directed horizontally along the floor
toward the wall—this force prevents the ladder from slipping. These two forces act on the ladder at its contact point
with the floor. The third force is the weight w of the ladder, attached at its CM located midway between its ends. The
fourth force is the normal reaction force F from the wall in the horizontal direction away from the wall, attached at
the contact point with the wall. There are no other forces because the wall is slippery, which means there is no
friction between the wall and the ladder. Based on this analysis, we adopt the frame of reference with the y-axis in
the vertical direction (parallel to the wall) and the x-axis in the horizontal direction (parallel to the floor). In this
frame, each force has either a horizontal component or a vertical component but not both, which simplifies the
solution. We select the pivot at the contact point with the floor. In the free-body diagram for the ladder, we indicate
the pivot, all four forces and their lever arms, and the angles between lever arms and the forces, as shown in Figure
12.15. With our choice of the pivot location, there is no torque either from the normal reaction force N or from the
static friction f because they both act at the pivot.

570 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.15 Free-body diagram for a ladder resting against a frictionless wall.
Solution
From the free-body diagram, the net force in the x-direction is
12.28
the net force in the y-direction is
12.29
and the net torque along the rotation axis at the pivot point is
12.30
where is the torque of the weight w and is the torque of the reaction F. From the free-body diagram, we
identify that the lever arm of the reaction at the wall is and the lever arm of the weight is
With the help of the free-body diagram, we identify the angles to be used in Equation 12.10 for
torques: for the torque from the reaction force with the wall, and for the
torque due to the weight. Now we are ready to use Equation 12.10 to compute torques:
We substitute the torques into Equation 12.30 and solve for
12.31
We obtain the normal reaction force with the floor by solving Equation 12.29: The magnitude of
friction is obtained by solving Equation 12.28: Since the ladder will slip if the angle is any
smaller, the static friction force is at its maximum angle and the coefficient of static friction is
The net force on the ladder at the contact point with the floor is the vector sum of the normal reaction from the floor
and the static friction forces:
Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 571
Its magnitude is
and its direction is
We should emphasize here two general observations of practical use. First, notice that when we choose a pivot
point, there is no expectation that the system will actually pivot around the chosen point. The ladder in this example
is not rotating at all but firmly stands on the floor; nonetheless, its contact point with the floor is a good choice for
the pivot. Second, notice when we use Equation 12.10 for the computation of individual torques, we do not need to
resolve the forces into their normal and parallel components with respect to the direction of the lever arm, and we
do not need to consider a sense of the torque. As long as the angle in Equation 12.10 is correctly identified—with the
help of a free-body diagram—as the angle measured counterclockwise from the direction of the lever arm to the
direction of the force vector, Equation 12.10 gives both the magnitude and the sense of the torque. This is because
torque is the vector product of the lever-arm vector crossed with the force vector, and Equation 12.10 expresses the
rectangular component of this vector product along the axis of rotation.
Significance
This result is independent of the length of the ladder because L is cancelled in the second equilibrium condition,
Equation 12.31. No matter how long or short the ladder is, as long as its weight is 400 N and the angle with the floor
is our results hold. But the ladder will slip if the net torque becomes negative in Equation 12.31. This happens
for some angles when the coefficient of static friction is not great enough to prevent the ladder from slipping.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.5
For the situation described in Example 12.5, determine the values of the coefficient of static friction for which the
ladder starts slipping, given that is the angle that the ladder makes with the floor.
EXAMPLE 12.6
Forces on Door Hinges
A swinging door that weighs is supported by hinges A and B so that the door can swing about a vertical
axis passing through the hinges Figure 12.16. The door has a width of and the door slab has a uniform
mass density. The hinges are placed symmetrically at the door’s edge in such a way that the door’s weight is evenly
distributed between them. The hinges are separated by distance Find the forces on the hinges when
the door rests half-open.

572 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.16 A 400-N swinging vertical door is supported by two hinges attached at points A and B.
Strategy
The forces that the door exerts on its hinges can be found by simply reversing the directions of the forces that the
hinges exert on the door. Hence, our task is to find the forces from the hinges on the door. Three forces act on the
door slab: an unknown force from hinge an unknown force from hinge and the known weight attached
at the center of mass of the door slab. The CM is located at the geometrical center of the door because the slab has
a uniform mass density. We adopt a rectangular frame of reference with the y-axis along the direction of gravity and
the x-axis in the plane of the slab, as shown in panel (a) of Figure 12.17, and resolve all forces into their rectangular
components. In this way, we have four unknown component forces: two components of force and and
two components of force and In the free-body diagram, we represent the two forces at the hinges by
their vector components, whose assumed orientations are arbitrary. Because there are four unknowns
and we must set up four independent equations. One equation is the equilibrium condition for forces in the
x-direction. The second equation is the equilibrium condition for forces in the y-direction. The third equation is the
equilibrium condition for torques in rotation about a hinge. Because the weight is evenly distributed between the
hinges, we have the fourth equation, To set up the equilibrium conditions, we draw a free-body diagram
and choose the pivot point at the upper hinge, as shown in panel (b) of Figure 12.17. Finally, we solve the equations
for the unknown force components and find the forces.
Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 573
FIGURE 12.17 (a) Geometry and (b) free-body diagram for the door.
Solution
From the free-body diagram for the door we have the first equilibrium condition for forces:
We select the pivot at point P (upper hinge, per the free-body diagram) and write the second equilibrium condition
for torques in rotation about point P:
12.32
We use the free-body diagram to find all the terms in this equation:
In evaluating we use the geometry of the triangle shown in part (a) of the figure. Now we substitute these
torques into Equation 12.32 and compute
Therefore the magnitudes of the horizontal component forces are The forces on the door are
The forces on the hinges are found from Newton’s third law as

574 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
Significance
Note that if the problem were formulated without the assumption of the weight being equally distributed between
the two hinges, we wouldn’t be able to solve it because the number of the unknowns would be greater than the
number of equations expressing equilibrium conditions.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.6
Solve the problem in Example 12.6 by taking the pivot position at the center of mass.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.7
A 50-kg person stands 1.5 m away from one end of a uniform 6.0-m-long scaffold of mass 70.0 kg. Find the tensions
in the two vertical ropes supporting the scaffold.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.8
A 400.0-N sign hangs from the end of a uniform strut. The strut is 4.0 m long and weighs 600.0 N. The strut is
supported by a hinge at the wall and by a cable whose other end is tied to the wall at a point 3.0 m above the left
end of the strut. Find the tension in the supporting cable and the force of the hinge on the strut.
Access for free at openstax.org