# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 52-57
############################################################

44 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Law of refraction (Snell’s law) n sinθ =n sinθ
1 1 2 2
Critical angle
θ
c=sin−1⎛
⎝
n
n
2⎞
⎠
forn
1
>n
2
1
Malus’s law I =I cos2 θ
0
Brewster’s law n
tanθ b = n 2
1
SUMMARY
1.1The Propagation of Light
• The speed of light in a vacuum is c=2.99792458×10 8 m/s≈3.00×10 8 m/s.
• Theindexofrefractionofamaterialis n=c/v, wherevisthespeedoflightinamaterialandcisthespeedof
light in a vacuum.
• Theraymodeloflightdescribesthepathoflightasstraightlines.Thepartofopticsdealingwiththerayaspectof
light is called geometric optics.
• Lightcantravelinthreewaysfromasourcetoanotherlocation:(1)directlyfromthesourcethroughemptyspace;
(2) through various media; and (3) after being reflected from a mirror.
1.2The Law of Reflection
• When a light ray strikes a smooth surface, the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
• A mirror has a smooth surface and reflects light at specific angles.
• Light is diffused when it reflects from a rough surface.
1.3Refraction
• The change of a light ray’s direction when it passes through variations in matter is called refraction.
• Thelawofrefraction,alsocalledSnell’slaw,relatestheindicesofrefractionfortwomediaataninterfacetothe
change in angle of a light ray passing through that interface.
1.4Total Internal Reflection
• The incident angle that produces an angle of refraction of 90° is called the critical angle.
• Totalinternalreflectionisaphenomenonthatoccursattheboundarybetweentwomedia,suchthatiftheincident
angle in the first medium is greater than the critical angle, then all the light is reflected back into that medium.
• Fiberopticsinvolvesthetransmissionoflightdownfibersofplasticorglass,applyingtheprincipleoftotalinternal
reflection.
• Cladding prevents light from being transmitted between fibers in a bundle.
• Diamonds sparkle due to total internal reflection coupled with a large index of refraction.
1.5Dispersion
• The spreading of white light into its full spectrum of wavelengths is called dispersion.
• Rainbowsareproducedbyacombinationofrefractionandreflection,andinvolvethedispersionofsunlightintoa
continuous distribution of colors.
• Dispersion produces beautiful rainbows but also causes problems in certain optical systems.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 45
1.6Huygens’s Principle
• AccordingtoHuygens’sprinciple,everypointonawavefrontisasourceofwaveletsthatspreadoutintheforward
direction at the same speed as the wave itself. The new wave front is tangent to all of the wavelets.
• A mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle, verifying the law of reflection.
• ThelawofrefractioncanbeexplainedbyapplyingHuygens’sprincipletoawavefrontpassingfromonemedium
to another.
• The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle is called diffraction.
1.7Polarization
• Polarizationistheattributethatwaveoscillationshaveadefinitedirectionrelativetothedirectionofpropagation
ofthewave.ThedirectionofpolarizationisdefinedtobethedirectionparalleltotheelectricfieldoftheEMwave.
• Unpolarized light is composed of many rays having random polarization directions.
• Unpolarizedlightcanbepolarizedbypassingitthroughapolarizingfilterorotherpolarizingmaterial.Theprocess
of polarizing light decreases its intensity by a factor of 2.
• The intensity, I, of polarized light after passing through a polarizing filter is I =I cos2 θ, where I is the
0 0
incident intensity and θ is the angle between the direction of polarization and the axis of the filter.
• Polarization is also produced by reflection.
• Brewster’slawstatesthatreflectedlightiscompletelypolarizedattheangleofreflection θ ,knownasBrewster’s
b
angle.
• Polarization can also be produced by scattering.
• Several types of optically active substances rotate the direction of polarization of light passing through them.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
1.1The Propagation of Light 1.3Refraction
1. Underwhatconditionscanlightbemodeledlikearay? 6. Diffusion by reflection from a rough surface is
Like a wave? described in this chapter. Light can also be diffused by
refraction.Describehowthisoccursinaspecificsituation,
2. Why is the index of refraction always greater than or such as light interacting with crushed ice.
equal to 1?
7. Will light change direction toward or away from the
3. Doesthefactthatthelightflashfromlightningreaches perpendicular when it goes from air to water? Water to
you before its sound prove that the speed of light is glass? Glass to air?
extremely large or simply that it is greater than the speed
of sound? Discuss how you could use this effect to get an 8. Explainwhyanobjectinwateralwaysappearstobeat
estimate of the speed of light. a depth shallower than it actually is?
4. Speculate as to what physical process might be 9. Explain why a person’s legs appear very short when
responsible for light traveling more slowly in a medium wading in a pool. Justify your explanation with a ray
than in a vacuum. diagram showing the path of rays from the feet to the eye
of an observer who is out of the water.
1.2The Law of Reflection 10. Explain why an oar that is partially submerged in
water appears bent.
5. Usingthelawofreflection,explainhowpowdertakes
the shine off of a person’s nose. What is the name of the
optical effect?
1.4Total Internal Reflection
11. Aringwithacolorlessgemstoneisdroppedintowater.

46 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
The gemstone becomes invisible when submerged. Can it 17. DoesHuygens’sprincipleapplytoalltypesofwaves?
be a diamond? Explain.
18. If diffraction is observed for some phenomenon, it is
12. The most common type of mirage is an illusion that evidencethatthephenomenonisawave.Doesthereverse
light from faraway objects is reflected by a pool of water hold true? That is, if diffraction is not observed, does that
that is not really there. Mirages are generally observed in mean the phenomenon is not a wave?
deserts, when there is a hot layer of air near the ground.
Given that the refractive index of air is lower for air at
higher temperatures, explain how mirages can be formed. 1.7Polarization
19. Can a sound wave in air be polarized? Explain.
13. How can you use total internal reflection to estimate
the index of refraction of a medium?
20. No light passes through two perfect polarizing filters
with perpendicular axes. However, if a third polarizing
filter is placed between the original two, some light can
1.5Dispersion
pass.Whyisthis?Underwhatcircumstancesdoesmostof
14. Isitpossiblethattotalinternalreflectionplaysarole the light pass?
in rainbows? Explain in terms of indices of refraction and
angles, perhaps referring to that shown below. Some of 21. Explain what happens to the energy carried by light
us have seen the formation of a double rainbow; is it that it is dimmed by passing it through two crossed
physically possible to observe a triple rainbow? polarizing filters.
22. Whenparticlesscatteringlightaremuchsmallerthan
its wavelength, the amount of scattering is proportional to
1. Does this mean there is more scattering for small λ
λ
thanlarge λ?Howdoesthisrelatetothefactthatthesky
is blue?
23. Usingtheinformationgivenintheprecedingquestion,
explain why sunsets are red.
24. When light is reflected at Brewster’s angle from a
(credit: "Chad"/Flickr) smooth surface, it is 100% polarized parallel to the
surface.Partofthelightwillberefractedintothesurface.
15. A high-quality diamond may be quite clear and Describe how you would do an experiment to determine
colorless, transmitting all visible wavelengths with little thepolarizationoftherefractedlight.Whatdirectionwould
absorption. Explain how it can sparkle with flashes of youexpectthepolarizationtohaveandwouldyouexpectit
brilliant color when illuminated by white light. to be 100%?
25. If you lie on a beach looking at the water with your
1.6Huygens’s Principle
headtippedslightlysideways,yourpolarizedsunglassesdo
16. Howdowaveeffectsdependonthesizeoftheobject not work very well. Why not?
with which the wave interacts? For example, why does
soundbendaroundthecornerofabuildingwhilelightdoes
not?
PROBLEMS
28. Calculate the index of refraction for a medium in
1.1The Propagation of Light whichthespeedoflightis 2.012×10 8 m/s, andidentify
26. What is the speed of light in water? In glycerine? the most likely substance based onTable 1.1.
27. What is the speed of light in air? In crown glass? 29. In what substance in Table 1.1 is the speed of light
8
2.290×10 m/s?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 47
30. There was a major collision of an asteroid with the
Moon in medieval times. It was described by monks at
Canterbury Cathedral in England as a red glow on and
aroundtheMoon.HowlongaftertheasteroidhittheMoon,
whichis 3.84×10 5 km away,wouldthelightfirstarrive
on Earth?
31. Components of some computers communicate with
each other through optical fibers having an index of
refraction n=1.55. Whattimeinnanosecondsisrequired
for a signal to travel 0.200 m through such a fiber?
32. Comparethetimeittakesforlighttotravel1000mon
the surface of Earth and in outer space.
33. How far does light travel underwater during a time
36. On the Moon’s surface, lunar astronauts placed a
interval of 1.50×10 −6 s? corner reflector, off which a laser beam is periodically
reflected. The distance tothe Mooniscalculated fromthe
round-trip time. What percent correction is needed to
account for the delay in time due to the slowing of light
1.2The Law of Reflection
in Earth’s atmosphere? Assume the distance to the Moon
34. Suppose a man stands in front of a mirror as shown
isprecisely 3.84×10 8 m andEarth’satmosphere(which
below. His eyes are 1.65 m above the floor and the top of
his head is 0.13 m higher. Find the height above the floor varies in density with altitude) is equivalent to a layer
of the top and bottom of the smallest mirror in which he 30.0 km thick with a constant index of refraction
can see both the top of his head and his feet. How is this n=1.000293.
distance related to the man’s height?
37. A flat mirror is neither converging nor diverging. To
prove this, consider two rays originating from the same
point and diverging at an angle θ (see below). Show that
after striking a plane mirror, the angle between their
directions remains θ.
35. Show that when light reflects from two mirrors that
meeteachotheratarightangle,theoutgoingrayisparallel 1.3Refraction
to the incoming ray, as illustrated below.
Unlessotherwisespecified,forproblems1through10,the
indicesofrefractionofglassandwatershouldbetakento
be 1.50 and 1.333, respectively.
38. Alightbeaminairhasanangleofincidenceof 35°
at the surface of a glass plate. What are the angles of
reflection and refraction?

48 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
39. Alightbeaminairisincidentonthesurfaceofapond, to air is 48.6°, as discussed at the end of Example 1.4,
makinganangleof 20° withrespecttothesurface.What regarding the critical angle for light traveling in a
are the angles of reflection and refraction? polystyrene (a type of plastic) pipe surrounded by air.
40. When a light ray crosses from water into glass, it 47. (a)AttheendofExample 1.4,itwasstatedthatthe
emerges at an angle of 30° with respect to the normal of criticalangleforlightgoingfromdiamondtoairis 24.4°.
the interface. What is its angle of incidence? Verify this. (b) What is the critical angle for light going
from zircon to air?
41. A pencil flashlight submerged in water sends a light
beam toward the surface at an angle of incidence of 30°. 48. Anopticalfiberusesflintglasscladwithcrownglass.
What is the angle of refraction in air? What is the critical angle?
42. Light rays from the Sun make a 30° angle to the 49. At what minimum angle will you get total internal
reflectionoflighttravelinginwaterandreflectedfromice?
vertical when seen from below the surface of a body of
water. At what angle above the horizon is the Sun?
50. Supposeyouareusingtotalinternalreflectiontomake
an efficient corner reflector. If there is air outside and the
43. Thepathofalightbeaminairgoesfromanangleof
incidenceof 35° toanangleofrefractionof 22° whenit
incidentangleis 45.0°,whatmustbetheminimumindex
of refraction of the material from which the reflector is
enters a rectangular block of plastic. What is the index of
made?
refraction of the plastic?
51. You can determine the index of refraction of a
44. Ascubadivertraininginapoollooksathisinstructor
substancebydeterminingitscriticalangle.(a)Whatisthe
as shown below. What angle does the ray from the
index of refraction of a substance that has a critical angle
instructor’s face make with the perpendicular to the water
atthepointwheretherayenters?Theanglebetweentheray of 68.4° whensubmergedinwater?Whatisthesubstance,
in the water and the perpendicular to the water is 25.0°. basedonTable 1.1?(b)Whatwouldthecriticalanglebe
for this substance in air?
52. A ray of light, emitted beneath the surface of an
unknown liquid with air above it, undergoes total internal
reflectionasshownbelow.Whatistheindexofrefraction
for the liquid and its likely identification?
45. (a) Using information in the preceding problem, find
53. Light rays fall normally on the vertical surface of
the height of the instructor’s head above the water, noting
the glass prism (n=1.50) shown below. (a) What is the
thatyouwillfirsthavetocalculatetheangleofincidence.
(b)Findtheapparentdepthofthediver’sheadbelowwater largestvaluefor ϕ suchthattherayistotallyreflectedat
as seen by the instructor. theslantedface?(b)Repeatthecalculationofpart(a)ifthe
prism is immersed in water.
1.4Total Internal Reflection
46. Verifythatthecriticalangleforlightgoingfromwater
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9