# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 200-207
############################################################

190 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
Figure 5.10 Induced polarization. A positively charged glass
rod is brought near the left side of the conducting sphere,
attracting negative charge and leaving the other side of the
sphere positively charged. Although the sphere is overall still
electrically neutral, it now has a charge distribution, so it can
exert an electric force on other nearby charges. Furthermore, the
distribution is such that it will be attracted to the glass rod.
Theresultistheformationofwhatiscalledanelectricdipole,fromaLatinphrasemeaning“twoends.”Thepresenceof
electricchargesontheinsulator—andtheelectricforcestheyapplytotheconductionelectrons—creates,or“induces,”the
dipole in the conductor.
Neutral objects can be attracted to any charged object. The pieces of straw attracted to polished amber are neutral, for
example.Ifyourunaplasticcombthroughyourhair,thechargedcombcanpickupneutralpiecesofpaper.Figure5.11
shows how the polarization of atoms and molecules in neutral objects results in their attraction to a charged object.
Figure 5.11 Both positive and negative objects attract a neutral object by polarizing its molecules. (a) A positive object
brought near a neutral insulator polarizes its molecules. There is a slight shift in the distribution of the electrons orbiting the
molecule, with unlike charges being brought nearer and like charges moved away. Since the electrostatic force decreases with
distance, there is a net attraction. (b) A negative object produces the opposite polarization, but again attracts the neutral object.
(c) The same effect occurs for a conductor; since the unlike charges are closer, there is a net attraction.
Whenachargedrodisbroughtnearaneutralsubstance,aninsulatorinthiscase,thedistributionofchargeinatomsand
moleculesisshiftedslightly.Oppositechargeisattractednearertheexternalchargedrod,whilelikechargeisrepelled.Since
theelectrostaticforcedecreaseswithdistance,therepulsionoflikechargesisweakerthantheattractionofunlikecharges,
and so there is a net attraction. Thus, a positively charged glass rod attracts neutral pieces of paper, as will a negatively
chargedrubberrod.Somemolecules,likewater,arepolarmolecules.Polarmoleculeshaveanaturalorinherentseparation
of charge, although they are neutral overall. Polar molecules are particularly affected by other charged objects and show
greater polarization effects than molecules with naturally uniform charge distributions.
When the two ends of a dipole can be separated, this method of charging by induction may be used to create charged
objects without transferring charge. In Figure 5.12, we see two neutral metal spheres in contact with one another but
insulatedfromtherestoftheworld.Apositivelychargedrodisbroughtnearoneofthem,attractingnegativechargetothat
side, leaving the other sphere positively charged.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 191
Figure 5.12 Charging by induction. (a) Two uncharged or neutral metal spheres are in contact with each
other but insulated from the rest of the world. (b) A positively charged glass rod is brought near the sphere
on the left, attracting negative charge and leaving the other sphere positively charged. (c) The spheres are
separated before the rod is removed, thus separating negative and positive charges. (d) The spheres retain
net charges after the inducing rod is removed—without ever having been touched by a charged object.
AnothermethodofchargingbyinductionisshowninFigure5.13.Theneutralmetalsphereispolarizedwhenacharged
rodisbroughtnearit.Thesphereisthengrounded,meaningthataconductingwireisrunfromthespheretotheground.
SinceEarthislargeandmostofthegroundisagoodconductor,itcansupplyoracceptexcesschargeeasily.Inthiscase,
electrons are attracted to the sphere through a wire called the ground wire, because it supplies a conducting path to the
ground. The ground connection is broken before the charged rod is removed, leaving the sphere with an excess charge
oppositetothatoftherod.Again,anoppositechargeisachieved whenchargingbyinduction,andthechargedrodloses
none of its excess charge.

192 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
Figure 5.13 Charging by induction using a ground connection. (a) A positively charged rod is brought near a neutral metal
sphere, polarizing it. (b) The sphere is grounded, allowing electrons to be attracted from Earth’s ample supply. (c) The ground
connection is broken. (d) The positive rod is removed, leaving the sphere with an induced negative charge.
5.3 | Coulomb's Law
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the electric force, both qualitatively and quantitatively
• Calculate the force that charges exert on each other
• Determine the direction of the electric force for different source charges
• Correctly describe and apply the superposition principle for multiple source charges
Experimentswithelectricchargeshaveshownthatiftwoobjectseachhaveelectriccharge,thentheyexertanelectricforce
oneachother.Themagnitudeoftheforceislinearlyproportionaltothenetchargeoneachobjectandinverselyproportional
to the square of the distance between them. (Interestingly, the force does not depend on the mass of the objects.) The
directionoftheforcevectorisalongtheimaginarylinejoiningthetwoobjectsandisdictatedbythesignsofthecharges
involved.
Let
• q , q = the net electric charges of the two objects;
1 2
• → r = the vector displacement from q to q .
12 1 2
→
Theelectricforce F ononeofthechargesisproportionaltothemagnitudeofitsownchargeandthemagnitudeofthe
other charge, and is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them:
q q
F ∝ 1 2.
r2
12
Thisproportionalitybecomesanequalitywiththeintroductionofaproportionalityconstant.Forreasonsthatwillbecome
clearinalaterchapter,theproportionalityconstantthatweuseisactuallyacollectionofconstants.(Wediscussthisconstant
shortly.)
Coulomb’s Law
The magnitude of the electric force (orCoulomb force) between two electrically charged particles is equal to
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 193
→ F (r)= 1 |q 1 q 2 | ‸ r (5.1)
12 4πε
0
r2 12
12
Weuseabsolutevaluesignsaroundtheproduct q q becauseoneofthechargesmaybenegative,butthemagnitude
1 2
oftheforceisalwayspositive.Thedirectionoftheforcevectordependsonthesignofthecharges.Ifthechargesare
thesame,theforcepointsawayfromtheothercharge.Ifthechargeshavedifferentsigns,theforcepointstowardthe
other charge(Figure 5.14).
→
Figure 5.14 The electrostatic force F between point charges q and q
1 2
separated by a distanceris given by Coulomb’s law. Note that Newton’s third law
(every force exerted creates an equal and opposite force) applies as usual—the force on
q is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force it exerts on q . (a)
1 2
Like charges; (b) unlike charges.
It is important to note that the electric force is not constant; it is a function of the separation distance between the two
charges.Ifeitherthetestchargeorthesourcecharge(orboth)move,then → r changes,andthereforesodoestheforce.An
immediateconsequenceofthisisthatdirectapplicationofNewton’slawswiththisforcecanbemathematicallydifficult,
depending on the specific problem at hand. It can (usually) be done, but we almost always look for easier methods of
calculating whatever physical quantity we are interested in. (Conservation of energy is the most common choice.)
Finally, the new constant ε in Coulomb’s law is called the permittivity of free space, or (better) the permittivity of
0
vacuum.Ithasaveryimportantphysicalmeaningthatwewilldiscussinalaterchapter;fornow,itissimplyanempirical
proportionality constant. Its numerical value (to three significant figures) turns out to be
ε =8.85×10−12
C2
.
0 N·m2
TheseunitsarerequiredtogivetheforceinCoulomb’slawthecorrectunitsofnewtons.NotethatinCoulomb’slaw,the
permittivityofvacuumisonlypartoftheproportionalityconstant.Forconvenience,weoftendefineaCoulomb’sconstant:
k e=
4π
1
ε 0
=8.99×10 9 N
C
·m
2
2 .
Example 5.1
The Force on the Electron in Hydrogen
A hydrogen atom consists of a single proton and a single electron. The proton has a charge of +e and the
electron has −e. In the “ground state” of the atom, the electron orbits the proton at most probable distance of
5.29×10−11 m (Figure 5.15). Calculate the electric force on the electron due to the proton.

194 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
Figure 5.15 A schematic depiction of a hydrogen atom,
showing the force on the electron. This depiction is only to
enable us to calculate the force; the hydrogen atom does not
really look like this. RecallFigure 5.7.
Strategy
For the purposes of this example, we are treating the electron and proton as two point particles, each with an
electric charge,andwearetoldthedistancebetweenthem;weareaskedtocalculate theforceontheelectron.
We thus use Coulomb’s law.
Solution
Our two charges and the distance between them are,
q = +e=+1.602×10 −19 C
1
q = −e=−1.602×10 −19 C
2
r = 5.29×10−11 m.
The magnitude of the force on the electron is
2
⎛ −19 ⎞
F = 1 |e| 2 = 1 ⎝ 1.602×10 C ⎠ =8.25×10 −8 N.
4πϵ 0 r2 4π ⎛ ⎝ 8.85×10−12 C 2 2 ⎞ ⎠ ⎛ ⎝ 5.29×10−11 m ⎞ ⎠ 2
N·m
Asforthedirection,sincethechargesonthetwoparticlesareopposite,theforceisattractive;theforceonthe
electronpointsradiallydirectlytowardtheproton,everywhereintheelectron’sorbit.Theforceisthusexpressed
as
→ ⎛ −8 ⎞^
F = 8.25×10 N r.
⎝ ⎠
Significance
This is a three-dimensional system, so the electron (and therefore the force on it) can be anywhere in an
imaginary spherical shell around the proton. In this “classical” model of the hydrogen atom, the electrostatic
forceontheelectronpointsintheinwardcentripetaldirection,thusmaintainingtheelectron’sorbit.Butnotethat
the quantum mechanical model of hydrogen (discussed in Quantum Mechanics (http://cnx.org/content/
m58573/latest/)) is utterly different.
5.1 Check Your UnderstandingWhat would be different if the electron also had a positive charge?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 195
Multiple Source Charges
Theanalysisthatwehavedonefortwoparticlescanbeextendedtoanarbitrarynumberofparticles;wesimplyrepeatthe
analysis, twochargesat atime. Specifically,weaskthe question: Given Ncharges(which werefer toassource charge),
whatisthenetelectricforcethattheyexertonsomeotherpointcharge(whichwecallthetestcharge)?Notethatweuse
these terms because we can think of the test charge being used to test the strength of the force provided by the source
charges.
Like all forces that we have seen up to now, the net electric force on our test charge is simply the vector sum of each
individualelectricforceexertedonitbyeachoftheindividualtestcharges.Thus,wecancalculatethenetforceonthetest
chargeQbycalculatingtheforceonitfromeachsourcecharge,takenoneatatime,andthenaddingallthoseforcestogether
(asvectors).Thisabilitytosimplyaddupindividualforcesinthiswayisreferredtoastheprincipleofsuperposition,and
is one of the more important features of the electric force. In mathematical form, this becomes
N (5.2)
→ F (r)=
4π
1
ε 0
Q
i
∑
=1 r
q
i 2
i^ ri.
Inthisexpression,Qrepresentsthechargeoftheparticlethatisexperiencingtheelectricforce → F ,andislocatedat → r
fromtheorigin;the q i’s aretheNsourcecharges,andthevectors → r i=r i ^ ri arethedisplacementsfromtheposition
oftheithchargetothepositionofQ.EachoftheNunitvectorspointsdirectlyfromitsassociatedsourcechargetowardthe
testcharge.AllofthisisdepictedinFigure 5.16.PleasenotethatthereisnophysicaldifferencebetweenQand q ;the
i
difference in labels is merely to allow clear discussion, withQbeing the charge we are determining the force on.
Figure 5.16 The eight source charges each apply a force on the
single test chargeQ. Each force can be calculated independently
of the other seven forces. This is the essence of the superposition
principle.
(Note that the force vector → F i does not necessarily point in the same direction as the unit vector ^ ri ; it may point in
theoppositedirection, − ^ ri .Thesignsofthesourcechargeandtestchargedeterminethedirectionoftheforceonthetest
charge.)
Thereisacomplication,however.Justasthesourcechargeseachexertaforceonthetestcharge,sotoo(byNewton’sthird
law)doesthetestchargeexertanequalandoppositeforceoneachofthesourcecharges.Asaconsequence,eachsource
chargewouldchangeposition.However,byEquation 5.2,theforceonthetestchargeisafunctionofposition;thus,as
thepositionsofthesourcechargeschange,thenetforceonthetestchargenecessarilychanges,whichchangestheforce,

196 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
whichagainchangesthepositions.Thus,theentiremathematicalanalysisquicklybecomesintractable.Later,wewilllearn
techniquesforhandlingthissituation,butfornow,wemakethesimplifyingassumptionthatthesourcechargesarefixed
inplacesomehow,sothattheirpositionsareconstantintime.(Thetestchargeisallowedtomove.)Withthisrestrictionin
place,theanalysisofchargesisknownaselectrostatics,where“statics”referstotheconstant(thatis,static)positionsof
the source charges and the force is referred to as anelectrostatic force.
Example 5.2
The Net Force from Two Source Charges
Threedifferent,smallchargedobjectsareplacedasshowninFigure 5.17.Thecharges q and q arefixed
1 3
inplace; q isfreetomove.Given q =2e, q =−3e,and q =−5e,andthat d =2.0×10 −7 m,whatis
2 1 2 3
the net force on the middle charge q ?
2
Figure 5.17 Source charges q and q each apply a force
1 3
on q .
2
Strategy
WeuseCoulomb’slawagain.Thewaythequestionisphrasedindicatesthat q isourtestcharge,sothat q and
2 1
q aresourcecharges.Theprincipleofsuperpositionsaysthattheforceon q fromeachoftheothercharges
3 2
isunaffectedbythepresenceoftheothercharge.Therefore,wewritedowntheforceon q fromeachandadd
2
them together as vectors.
Solution
Wehavetwosourcecharges (q and q ), atestcharge (q ), distances (r and r ), andweareaskedto
1 3 2 21 23
find a force. This calls for Coulomb’s law and superposition of forces. There are two forces:
⎡ ⎛ ⎞⎤
→ → → q q ^ q q ^
F = F + F = 1 ⎢ 2 1 j +⎜− 2 3 i⎟⎥.
21 23 4πε 0⎣ r2 ⎝ r2 ⎠⎦
21 23
→
We can’t add these forces directly because they don’t point in the same direction: F points only in
12
→
the −x-direction, while F points only in the +y-direction. The net force is obtained from applying the
13
Pythagorean theorem to itsx- andy-components:
F = F x 2+F y 2
where
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9