# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 483-491
############################################################

10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 471
10.16
The units of Equation 10.16 are joules (J). The equation in this form is complete, but awkward; we need to find a
way to generalize it.
Moment of Inertia
If we compare Equation 10.16 to the way we wrote kinetic energy in Work and Kinetic Energy, , this
suggests we have a new rotational variable to add to our list of our relations between rotational and translational
variables. The quantity is the counterpart for mass in the equation for rotational kinetic energy. This is an
important new term for rotational motion. This quantity is called the moment of inertia I, with units of :
10.17
For now, we leave the expression in summation form, representing the moment of inertia of a system of point
particles rotating about a fixed axis. We note that the moment of inertia of a single point particle about a fixed axis is
simply , with r being the distance from the point particle to the axis of rotation. In the next section, we explore
the integral form of this equation, which can be used to calculate the moment of inertia of some regular-shaped rigid
bodies.
The moment of inertia is the quantitative measure of rotational inertia, just as in translational motion, and mass is
the quantitative measure of linear inertia—that is, the more massive an object is, the more inertia it has, and the
greater is its resistance to change in linear velocity. Similarly, the greater the moment of inertia of a rigid body or
system of particles, the greater is its resistance to change in angular velocity about a fixed axis of rotation. It is
interesting to see how the moment of inertia varies with r, the distance to the axis of rotation of the mass particles in
Equation 10.17. Rigid bodies and systems of particles with more mass concentrated at a greater distance from the
axis of rotation have greater moments of inertia than bodies and systems of the same mass, but concentrated near
the axis of rotation. In this way, we can see that a hollow cylinder has more rotational inertia than a solid cylinder of
the same mass when rotating about an axis through the center. Substituting Equation 10.17 into Equation 10.16, the
expression for the kinetic energy of a rotating rigid body becomes
10.18
We see from this equation that the kinetic energy of a rotating rigid body is directly proportional to the moment of
inertia and the square of the angular velocity. This is exploited in flywheel energy-storage devices, which are
designed to store large amounts of rotational kinetic energy. Many carmakers are now testing flywheel energy
storage devices in their automobiles, such as the flywheel, or kinetic energy recovery system, shown in Figure
10.18.

472 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.18 A KERS (kinetic energy recovery system) flywheel used in cars. (credit: “cmonville”/Flickr)
The rotational and translational quantities for kinetic energy and inertia are summarized in Table 10.4. The
relationship column is not included because a constant doesn’t exist by which we could multiply the rotational
quantity to get the translational quantity, as can be done for the variables in Table 10.3.
Rotational Translational
TABLE 10.4 Rotational and
Translational Kinetic Energies and
Inertia
EXAMPLE 10.8
Moment of Inertia of a System of Particles
Six small washers are spaced 10 cm apart on a rod of negligible mass and 0.5 m in length. The mass of each washer
is 20 g. The rod rotates about an axis located at 25 cm, as shown in Figure 10.19. (a) What is the moment of inertia
of the system? (b) If the two washers closest to the axis are removed, what is the moment of inertia of the remaining
four washers? (c) If the system with six washers rotates at 5 rev/s, what is its rotational kinetic energy?
Access for free at openstax.org

10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 473
FIGURE 10.19 Six washers are spaced 10 cm apart on a rod of negligible mass and rotating about a vertical axis.
Strategy
a. We use the definition for moment of inertia for a system of particles and perform the summation to evaluate
this quantity. The masses are all the same so we can pull that quantity in front of the summation symbol.
b. We do a similar calculation.
c. We insert the result from (a) into the expression for rotational kinetic energy.
Solution
a. .
b. .
c. .
Significance
We can see the individual contributions to the moment of inertia. The masses close to the axis of rotation have a
very small contribution. When we removed them, it had a very small effect on the moment of inertia.
In the next section, we generalize the summation equation for point particles and develop a method to calculate
moments of inertia for rigid bodies. For now, though, Figure 10.20 gives values of moment of inertia for common
object shapes around specified axes.

474 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.20 Moment of inertia for common shapes of objects.
Applying Rotational Kinetic Energy
Now let’s apply the ideas of rotational kinetic energy and the moment of inertia table to get a feeling for the energy
associated with a few rotating objects. The following examples will also help get you comfortable using these
equations. First, let’s look at a general problem-solving strategy for rotational energy.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rotational Energy
1. Determine that energy or work is involved in the rotation.
2. Determine the system of interest. A sketch usually helps.
3. Analyze the situation to determine the types of work and energy involved.
4. If there are no losses of energy due to friction and other nonconservative forces, mechanical energy is
conserved, that is, .
5. If nonconservative forces are present, mechanical energy is not conserved, and other forms of energy, such as
heat and light, may enter or leave the system. Determine what they are and calculate them as necessary.
6. Eliminate terms wherever possible to simplify the algebra.
7. Evaluate the numerical solution to see if it makes sense in the physical situation presented in the wording of
the problem.
Access for free at openstax.org

10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 475
EXAMPLE 10.9
Calculating Helicopter Energies
A typical small rescue helicopter has four blades: Each is 4.00 m long and has a mass of 50.0 kg (Figure 10.21). The
blades can be approximated as thin rods that rotate about one end of an axis perpendicular to their length. The
helicopter has a total loaded mass of 1000 kg. (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy in the blades when they
rotate at 300 rpm. (b) Calculate the translational kinetic energy of the helicopter when it flies at 20.0 m/s, and
compare it with the rotational energy in the blades.
FIGURE 10.21 (a) Sketch of a four-blade helicopter. (b) A water rescue operation featuring a helicopter from the Auckland Westpac Rescue
Helicopter Service. (credit b: modification of work by “111 Emergency”/Flickr)
Strategy
Rotational and translational kinetic energies can be calculated from their definitions. The wording of the problem
gives all the necessary constants to evaluate the expressions for the rotational and translational kinetic energies.
Solution
a. The rotational kinetic energy is
We must convert the angular velocity to radians per second and calculate the moment of inertia before we can
find K. The angular velocity is
The moment of inertia of one blade is that of a thin rod rotated about its end, listed in Figure 10.20. The total I
is four times this moment of inertia because there are four blades. Thus,
Entering and I into the expression for rotational kinetic energy gives
b. Entering the given values into the equation for translational kinetic energy, we obtain
To compare kinetic energies, we take the ratio of translational kinetic energy to rotational kinetic energy. This
ratio is

476 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
Significance
The ratio of translational energy to rotational kinetic energy is only 0.380. This ratio tells us that most of the kinetic
energy of the helicopter is in its spinning blades.
EXAMPLE 10.10
Energy in a Baton
A person hurls a baton into the air with a velocity of 30.0 m/s at an angle of with respect to the horizontal
(Figure 10.22). It has a mass of 1.0 kg and is rotating at 10.0 rev/s. The moment of inertia of the baton is given as
where . (a) What is the total energy of the baton when it leaves the hand? (b) How high does
the baton go from the elevation of the hand, neglecting air resistance?
FIGURE 10.22 A baton is hurled into the air at an initial angle of .
Strategy
We use the definitions of rotational and linear kinetic energy to find the total energy of the system. The problem
states to neglect air resistance, so we don’t have to worry about energy loss. In part (b), we use conservation of
mechanical energy to find the maximum height of the baton.
Solution
a. Moment of inertia: .
Angular velocity: .
The rotational kinetic energy is therefore
The translational kinetic energy is
Thus, the total energy in the baton is
b. We use conservation of mechanical energy. Since the baton is launched at an angle, we need to write the total
energies of the system in terms of its linear kinetic energies using the velocity in the x- and y-directions. The
total energy when the baton leaves the hand is
Access for free at openstax.org

10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 477
The total energy at maximum height is
By conservation of mechanical energy, so we have, after canceling like terms,
Since , we find
Significance
In part (b), the solution demonstrates how energy conservation is an alternative method to solve a problem that
normally would be solved using kinematics. In the absence of air resistance, the rotational kinetic energy was not a
factor in the solution for the maximum height.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.4
A nuclear submarine propeller has a moment of inertia of . If the submerged propeller has a rotation
rate of 4.0 rev/s when the engine is cut, what is the rotation rate of the propeller after 5.0 s when water resistance
has taken 50,000 J out of the system?
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the moment of inertia for uniformly shaped, rigid bodies
• Apply the parallel axis theorem to find the moment of inertia about any axis parallel to one already known
• Calculate the moment of inertia for compound objects
In the preceding section, we defined the moment of inertia but did not show how to calculate it. In this section, we
show how to calculate the moment of inertia for several standard types of objects, as well as how to use known
moments of inertia to find the moment of inertia for a shifted axis or for a compound object. This section is very
useful for seeing how to apply a general equation to complex objects (a skill that is critical for more advanced
physics and engineering courses).
Moment of Inertia
We defined the moment of inertia I of an object to be for all the point masses that make up the object.
Because r is the distance to the axis of rotation from each piece of mass that makes up the object, the moment of
inertia for any object depends on the chosen axis. To see this, let’s take a simple example of two masses at the end
of a massless (negligibly small mass) rod (Figure 10.23) and calculate the moment of inertia about two different
axes. In this case, the summation over the masses is simple because the two masses at the end of the barbell can
be approximated as point masses, and the sum therefore has only two terms.
In the case with the axis in the center of the barbell, each of the two masses m is a distance R away from the axis,
giving a moment of inertia of
In the case with the axis at the end of the barbell—passing through one of the masses—the moment of inertia is

478 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
From this result, we can conclude that it is twice as hard to rotate the barbell about the end than about its center.
FIGURE 10.23 (a) A barbell with an axis of rotation through its center; (b) a barbell with an axis of rotation through one end.
In this example, we had two point masses and the sum was simple to calculate. However, to deal with objects that
are not point-like, we need to think carefully about each of the terms in the equation. The equation asks us to sum
over each ‘piece of mass’ a certain distance from the axis of rotation. But what exactly does each ‘piece of mass’
mean? Recall that in our derivation of this equation, each piece of mass had the same magnitude of velocity, which
means the whole piece had to have a single distance r to the axis of rotation. However, this is not possible unless we
take an infinitesimally small piece of mass dm, as shown in Figure 10.24.
FIGURE 10.24 Using an infinitesimally small piece of mass to calculate the contribution to the total moment of inertia.
The need to use an infinitesimally small piece of mass dm suggests that we can write the moment of inertia by
evaluating an integral over infinitesimal masses rather than doing a discrete sum over finite masses:
10.19
This, in fact, is the form we need to generalize the equation for complex shapes. It is best to work out specific
examples in detail to get a feel for how to calculate the moment of inertia for specific shapes. This is the focus of
most of the rest of this section.
A uniform thin rod with an axis through the center
Consider a uniform (density and shape) thin rod of mass M and length L as shown in Figure 10.25. We want a thin
rod so that we can assume the cross-sectional area of the rod is small and the rod can be thought of as a string of
masses along a one-dimensional straight line. In this example, the axis of rotation is perpendicular to the rod and
passes through the midpoint for simplicity. Our task is to calculate the moment of inertia about this axis. We orient
the axes so that the z-axis is the axis of rotation and the x-axis passes through the length of the rod, as shown in the
Access for free at openstax.org