# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 36-39
############################################################

24 1 • Units and Measurement
guess about the relevant variables, estimating is very useful in developing physical intuition. Estimates also allow us
to perform “sanity checks” on calculations or policy proposals by helping us rule out certain scenarios or unrealistic
numbers. They allow us to challenge others (as well as ourselves) in our efforts to learn truths about the world.
Many estimates are based on formulas in which the input quantities are known only to a limited precision. As you
develop physics problem-solving skills (which are applicable to a wide variety of fields), you also will develop skills
at estimating. You develop these skills by thinking quantitatively and being willing to take risks. As with any skill,
experience helps. Familiarity with dimensions (see Table 1.3) and units (see Table 1.1 and Table 1.2), and the scales
of base quantities (see Figure 1.4) also helps.
To make some progress in estimating, you need to have some definite ideas about how variables may be related.
The following strategies may help you in practicing the art of estimation:
• Get big lengths from smaller lengths. When estimating lengths, remember that anything can be a ruler. Thus,
imagine breaking a big thing into smaller things, estimate the length of one of the smaller things, and multiply
to get the length of the big thing. For example, to estimate the height of a building, first count how many floors
it has. Then, estimate how big a single floor is by imagining how many people would have to stand on each
other’s shoulders to reach the ceiling. Last, estimate the height of a person. The product of these three
estimates is your estimate of the height of the building. It helps to have memorized a few length scales
relevant to the sorts of problems you find yourself solving. For example, knowing some of the length scales in
Figure 1.4 might come in handy. Sometimes it also helps to do this in reverse—that is, to estimate the length of
a small thing, imagine a bunch of them making up a bigger thing. For example, to estimate the thickness of a
sheet of paper, estimate the thickness of a stack of paper and then divide by the number of pages in the stack.
These same strategies of breaking big things into smaller things or aggregating smaller things into a bigger
thing can sometimes be used to estimate other physical quantities, such as masses and times.
• Get areas and volumes from lengths. When dealing with an area or a volume of a complex object, introduce a
simple model of the object such as a sphere or a box. Then, estimate the linear dimensions (such as the radius
of the sphere or the length, width, and height of the box) first, and use your estimates to obtain the volume or
area from standard geometric formulas. If you happen to have an estimate of an object’s area or volume, you
can also do the reverse; that is, use standard geometric formulas to get an estimate of its linear dimensions.
• Get masses from volumes and densities. When estimating masses of objects, it can help first to estimate its
volume and then to estimate its mass from a rough estimate of its average density (recall, density has
dimension mass over length cubed, so mass is density times volume). For this, it helps to remember that the
density of air is around 1 kg/m3, the density of water is 103 kg/m3, and the densest everyday solids max out at
around 104 kg/m3. Asking yourself whether an object floats or sinks in either air or water gets you a ballpark
estimate of its density. You can also do this the other way around; if you have an estimate of an object’s mass
and its density, you can use them to get an estimate of its volume.
• If all else fails, bound it. For physical quantities for which you do not have a lot of intuition, sometimes the
best you can do is think something like: Well, it must be bigger than this and smaller than that. For example,
suppose you need to estimate the mass of a moose. Maybe you have a lot of experience with moose and know
their average mass offhand. If so, great. But for most people, the best they can do is to think something like: It
must be bigger than a person (of order 102 kg) and less than a car (of order 103 kg). If you need a single
number for a subsequent calculation, you can take the geometric mean of the upper and lower bound—that is,
you multiply them together and then take the square root. For the moose mass example, this would be
The tighter the bounds, the better. Also, no rules are unbreakable when it comes to estimation. If you think the
value of the quantity is likely to be closer to the upper bound than the lower bound, then you may want to
bump up your estimate from the geometric mean by an order or two of magnitude.
• One “sig. fig.” is fine. There is no need to go beyond one significant figure, or one digit in the coefficient of an
expression in scientific notation, when doing calculations to obtain an estimate. In most cases, the order of
magnitude is good enough. The goal is just to get in the ballpark figure, so keep the arithmetic as simple as
possible.
• Ask yourself: Does this make any sense? Last, check to see whether your answer is reasonable. How does it
compare with the values of other quantities with the same dimensions that you already know or can look up
Access for free at openstax.org

1.5 • Estimates and Fermi Calculations 25
easily? If you get some wacky answer (for example, if you estimate the mass of the Atlantic Ocean to be bigger
than the mass of Earth, or some time span to be longer than the age of the universe), first check to see
whether your units are correct. Then, check for arithmetic errors. Then, rethink the logic you used to arrive at
your answer. If everything checks out, you may have just proved that some slick new idea is actually bogus.
EXAMPLE 1.6
Mass of Earth’s Oceans
Estimate the total mass of the oceans on Earth.
Strategy
We know the density of water is about 103 kg/m3, so we start with the advice to “get masses from densities and
volumes.” Thus, we need to estimate the volume of the planet’s oceans. Using the advice to “get areas and volumes
from lengths,” we can estimate the volume of the oceans as surface area times average depth, or V = AD. We know
the diameter of Earth from Figure 1.4 and we know that most of Earth’s surface is covered in water, so we can
estimate the surface area of the oceans as being roughly equal to the surface area of the planet. By following the
advice to “get areas and volumes from lengths” again, we can approximate Earth as a sphere and use the formula
for the surface area of a sphere of diameter d—that is, to estimate the surface area of the oceans. Now we
just need to estimate the average depth of the oceans. For this, we use the advice: “If all else fails, bound it.” We
happen to know the deepest points in the ocean are around 10 km and that it is not uncommon for the ocean to be
deeper than 1 km, so we take the average depth to be around Now we just need to
put it all together, heeding the advice that “one ‘sig. fig.’ is fine.”
Solution
We estimate the surface area of Earth (and hence the surface area of Earth’s oceans) to be roughly
Next, using our average depth estimate of which was obtained by bounding, we estimate the
volume of Earth’s oceans to be
Last, we estimate the mass of the world’s oceans to be
Thus, we estimate that the order of magnitude of the mass of the planet’s oceans is 1021 kg.
Significance
To verify our answer to the best of our ability, we first need to answer the question: Does this make any sense? From
Figure 1.4, we see the mass of Earth’s atmosphere is on the order of 1019 kg and the mass of Earth is on the order of
1025 kg. It is reassuring that our estimate of 1021 kg for the mass of Earth’s oceans falls somewhere between these
two. So, yes, it does seem to make sense. It just so happens that we did a search on the Web for “mass of oceans”
and the top search results all said which is the same order of magnitude as our estimate. Now,
rather than having to trust blindly whoever first put that number up on a website (most of the other sites probably
just copied it from them, after all), we can have a little more confidence in it.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.7
Figure 1.4 says the mass of the atmosphere is 1019 kg. Assuming the density of the atmosphere is 1 kg/m3,
estimate the height of Earth’s atmosphere. Do you think your answer is an underestimate or an overestimate?
Explain why.
How many piano tuners are there in New York City? How many leaves are on that tree? If you are studying

26 1 • Units and Measurement
photosynthesis or thinking of writing a smartphone app for piano tuners, then the answers to these questions might
be of great interest to you. Otherwise, you probably couldn’t care less what the answers are. However, these are
exactly the sorts of estimation problems that people in various tech industries have been asking potential
employees to evaluate their quantitative reasoning skills. If building physical intuition and evaluating quantitative
claims do not seem like sufficient reasons for you to practice estimation problems, how about the fact that being
good at them just might land you a high-paying job?
INTERACTIVE
For practice estimating relative lengths, areas, and volumes, check out this PhET (https://openstax.org/l/
21lengthgame) simulation, titled “Estimation.”
1.6 Significant Figures
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the correct number of significant figures for the result of a computation.
• Describe the relationship between the concepts of accuracy, precision, uncertainty, and discrepancy.
• Calculate the percent uncertainty of a measurement, given its value and its uncertainty.
• Determine the uncertainty of the result of a computation involving quantities with given uncertainties.
Figure 1.11 shows two instruments used to measure the mass of an object. The digital scale has mostly replaced
the double-pan balance in physics labs because it gives more accurate and precise measurements. But what exactly
do we mean by accurate and precise? Aren’t they the same thing? In this section we examine in detail the process of
making and reporting a measurement.
FIGURE 1.11 (a) A double-pan mechanical balance is used to compare different masses. Usually an object with unknown mass is placed in
one pan and objects of known mass are placed in the other pan. When the bar that connects the two pans is horizontal, then the masses in
both pans are equal. The “known masses” are typically metal cylinders of standard mass such as 1 g, 10 g, and 100 g. (b) Many mechanical
balances, such as double-pan balances, have been replaced by digital scales, which can typically measure the mass of an object more
precisely. A mechanical balance may read only the mass of an object to the nearest tenth of a gram, but many digital scales can measure
the mass of an object up to the nearest thousandth of a gram. (credit a: modification of work by Serge Melki; credit b: modification of work
by Karel Jakubec)
Accuracy and Precision of a Measurement
Science is based on observation and experiment—that is, on measurements. Accuracy is how close a measurement
is to the accepted reference value for that measurement. For example, let’s say we want to measure the length of
standard printer paper. The packaging in which we purchased the paper states that it is 11.0 in. long. We then
measure the length of the paper three times and obtain the following measurements: 11.1 in., 11.2 in., and 10.9 in.
These measurements are quite accurate because they are very close to the reference value of 11.0 in. In contrast, if
we had obtained a measurement of 12 in., our measurement would not be very accurate. Notice that the concept of
accuracy requires that an accepted reference value be given.
Access for free at openstax.org