# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 528-534
############################################################

520 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Name Symbol Quarks Charge (e) Spin Mass (GeV/c2 )
Charmed eta η
0
c−c 0 0 2.98
Neutral D 0 −uc 0 0 1.86
D
Neutral D *0 −uc 0 1 2.01
D
Positive D + − 1 0 1.87
D dc
Neutral B B 0 − db 0 0 5.26
Upsilon ϒ − 0 1 9.46
bb
Table 11.5Meson Quarks
Color
Quarks are fermions that obey Pauli’s exclusion principle, so it might be surprising to learn that three quarks can bind
togetherwithinanucleus.Forexample,howcantwoupquarksexistinthesamesmallregionofspacewithinaproton?The
solutionistoinventathirdnewpropertytodistinguishthem.Thispropertyiscalledcolor,anditplaysthesameroleinthe
strongnuclearinteractionaschargedoesinelectromagneticinteractions.Forthisreason,quarkcolorissometimescalled
“strong charge.”
Quarks come in three colors: red, green, and blue. (These are just labels—quarks are not actually colored.) Each type of
quark (u, d, c, s, b, t) canpossessanyothercolors.Forexample,threestrangequarksexist:aredstrangequark,agreen
strangequark,andabluestrangequark.Antiquarkshaveanticolor.Quarksthatbindtogethertoformhadrons(baryonsand
mesons)mustbecolorneutral,colorless,or“white.”Thus,abaryonmustcontainared,blue,andgreenquark.Likewise,a
mesoncontainseitherared-antired,blue-antiblue,orgreen-antigreenquarkpair.Thus,twoquarkscanbefoundinthesame
spin state in a hadron, without violating Pauli’s exclusion principle, because their colors are different.
Quark Confinement
ThefirststrongevidencefortheexistenceofquarkscamefromaseriesofexperimentsperformedattheStanfordLinear
AcceleratorCenter(SLAC)andatCERNaround1970.Thisexperimentwasdesignedtoprobethestructureoftheproton,
muchlikeRutherfordstudiedstructureinsidetheatomwithhis α-particlescatteringexperiments.Electronswerecollided
with protons with energy in excess of 20 GeV. At this energy, E≈ pc, so the de Broglie wavelength of an electron is
λ= h p = h E c ≈6×10 −17 m. (11.1)
Thewavelengthoftheelectronismuchsmallerthanthediameteroftheproton(about 10 −15 m). Thus,likeanautomobile
traveling through a rocky mountain range, electrons can be used to probe the structure of the nucleus.
TheSLACexperimentsfoundthatsomeelectronsweredeflectedatverylargeangles,indicatingsmallscatteringcenters
withintheproton.Thescatteringdistributionwasconsistentwithelectronsbeingscatteredfromsiteswithspin1/2,thespin
ofquarks.TheexperimentsatCERNusedneutrinosinsteadofelectrons.Thisexperimentalsofoundevidenceforthetiny
scatteringcenters.Inbothexperiments,theresultssuggestedthatthechargesofthescatteringparticleswereeither +2/3e
or −1/3e, in agreement with the quark model.
Watch thisvideo (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21quarks)to learn more about quarks.
The quark model has been extremely successful in organizing the complex world of subatomic particles. Interestingly,
however, no experiment has ever produced an isolated quark. All quarks have fractional charge and should therefore be
easilydistinguishablefromtheknownelementaryparticles,whosechargesareallanintegermultipleofe.Whyareisolated
quarks not observed? In current models of particle interactions, the answer is expressed in terms of quark confinement.
Quarkconfinementreferstotheconfinementofquarksingroupsoftwoorthreeinasmallregionofspace.Thequarksare
completelyfreetomoveaboutinthisspace,andsendandreceivegluons(thecarriersofthestrongforce).However,ifthese
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 521
quarksstraytoofarfromoneanother,thestrongforcepullsthembackit.Thisactionislikenedtoabola,aweaponused
forhunting(Figure11.5).Thestonesaretiedtoacentralpointbyastring,sononeoftherockscanmovetoofarfromthe
others.Thebolacorrespondstoabaryon,thestonescorrespondtoquarks,andthestringcorrespondstothegluonsthathold
the system together.
Figure 11.5 A baryon is analogous to a bola, a weapon used
for hunting. The rocks in this image correspond to the baryon
quarks. The quarks are free to move about but must remain close
to the other quarks.
11.4 | Particle Accelerators and Detectors
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compare and contrast different types of particle accelerators
• Describe the purpose, components, and function of a typical colliding beam machine
• Explain the role of each type of subdetector of a typical multipurpose particle detector
• Use the curvature of a charge track to determine the momentum of a particle
Thegoalofexperimentalparticlephysicsistoaccuratelymeasureelementaryparticles.Theprimarymethodusedtoachieve
this end is to produce these particles in high-energy collisions and then measure the products of using highly sensitive
particledetectors.Theseexperimentsareusedtotestandrevisescientificmodelsofparticleinteractions.Thepurposeof
thissectionistodescribeparticleacceleratorsanddetectors.Modernmachinesarebasedonearlierones,soitishelpfulto
present a brief history of accelerators and detectors.
Early Particle Accelerators
A particle accelerator is a machine designed to accelerate charged particles. This acceleration is usually achieved with
strongelectricfields,magneticfields,orboth.AsimpleexampleofaparticleacceleratoristheVandeGraaffaccelerator
(see Electric Potential (http://cnx.org/content/m58427/latest/) ). This type of accelerator collects charges on a
hollowmetalsphereusingamovingbelt.Whentheelectrostaticpotentialdifferenceofthesphereissufficientlylarge,the
field is used to accelerate particles through an evacuated tube. Energies produced by a Van de Graaff accelerator are not
large enough to create new particles, but the machine was important for early exploration of the atomic nucleus.
Largerenergiescanbeproducedbyalinearaccelerator(calleda“linac”).Chargedparticlesproducedatthebeginningofthe
linacareacceleratedbyacontinuouslineofchargedhollowtubes.Thevoltagebetweenagivenpairoftubesissettodraw
thechargedparticlein,andoncetheparticlearrives,thevoltagebetweenthenextpairoftubesissettopushthecharged
particle out. In other words, voltages are applied in such a way that the tubes deliver a series of carefully synchronized
electrickicks(Figure 11.6).Modernlinacsemployradiofrequency(RF)cavitiesthatsetuposcillatingelectromagnetic

522 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
fields,whichpropeltheparticleforwardlikeasurferonanoceanwave.Linacscanaccelerateelectronstoover100MeV.
(Electronswithkineticenergiesgreaterthan2MeVaremovingveryclosetothespeedoflight.)Inmodernparticleresearch,
linear accelerators are often used in the first stage of acceleration.
Figure 11.6 In a linear accelerator, charged tubes accelerate particles in a series of electromagnetic kicks. Each tube is longer
than the preceding tube because the particle is moving faster as it accelerates.
Example 11.5
Accelerating Tubes
Alinearacceleratordesignedtoproduceabeamof800-MeVprotonshas2000acceleratingtubesseparatedby
gaps. What average voltage must be applied between tubes to achieve the desired energy? (Hint: U =qV.)
Strategy
The energy given to the proton in each gap between tubes is U =qV, where q is the proton’s charge
and V is the potential difference (voltage) across the gap. Since q=q e=1.6×10 −19 C and
1eV=(1V) ⎛ 1.6×10 −19 C ⎞ , the proton gains 1 eV in energy for each volt across the gap that it passes
⎝ ⎠
through.Theacvoltageappliedtothetubesistimedsothatitaddstotheenergyineachgap.Theeffectivevoltage
is the sum of the gap voltages and equals 800 MV to give each proton an energy of 800 MeV.
Solution
Thereare2000gapsandthesumofthevoltagesacrossthemis800MV.Therefore,theaveragevoltageapplied
is 0.4 MV or 400 kV.
Significance
Avoltageofthismagnitudeisnotdifficulttoachieveinavacuum.Muchlargergapvoltageswouldberequired
for higher energy, such as those at the 50-GeV SLAC facility. Synchrotrons are aided by the circular path of
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 523
theacceleratedparticles,whichcanorbitmanytimes,effectivelymultiplyingthenumberofaccelerationsbythe
number of orbits. This makes it possible to reach energies greater than 1 TeV.
11.5 CheckYourUnderstandingHowmuchenergydoesanelectronreceiveinacceleratingthrougha1-V
potential difference?
Thenext-generationacceleratorafterthelinacisthecyclotron(Figure 11.7).Acyclotronusesalternatingelectricfields
andfixedmagnetstoaccelerateparticlesinacircularspiralpath.Aparticleatthecenterofthecyclotronisfirstaccelerated
byanelectricfieldinagapbetweentwoD-shapedmagnets(Dees).AstheparticlecrossesovertheD-shapedmagnet,the
particleisbentintoacircularpathbyaLorentzforce.(TheLorentzforcewasdiscussedinMagneticForcesandFields
(http://cnx.org/content/m58737/latest/) .)Assumingnoenergylosses,themomentumoftheparticleisrelatedtoits
radius of curvature by
p=0.3Br (11.2)
wherepisthemomentuminGeV/c,Bisinteslas,andristheradiusofthetrajectory(“orbit”)inmeters.Thisexpression
is valid to classical and relativistic velocities. The circular trajectory returns the particle to the electric field gap, the
electric field is reversed, and the process continues. As the particle is accelerated, the radius of curvature gets larger and
larger—spirally outward—until the electrons leave the device.
Figure 11.7 Cyclotrons use a magnetic field to cause particles
to move in circular orbits. As the particles pass between the
plates of the “Dees,” the voltage across the gap is reversed so
the particles are accelerated twice in each orbit.
Watch thisvideo (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21cyclotron)to learn more about cyclotrons.
A synchrotron is a circular accelerator that uses alternating voltage and increasing magnetic field strength to accelerate
particles to higher energies. Charged particles are accelerated by RF cavities, and steered and focused by magnets. RF
cavitiesaresynchronizedtodeliver“kicks”totheparticlesastheypassby,hencethename.Steeringhigh-energyparticles
requiresstrongmagneticfields,sosuperconductingmagnetsareoftenusedtoreduceheatlosses.Asthechargedparticles
move in a circle, they radiate energy: According to classical theory, any charged particle that accelerates (and circular
motion is an accelerated motion) also radiates. In a synchrotron, such radiation is called synchrotron radiation. This
radiation is useful for many other purposes, such as medical and materials research.

524 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Example 11.6
The Energy of an Electron in a Cyclotron
Anelectronisacceleratedusingacyclotron.Ifthemagneticfieldis1.5Tandtheradiusofthe“Dees”is1.2m,
what is the kinetic energy of the outgoing particle?
Strategy
Iftheradiusoforbitoftheelectronexceedstheradiusofthe“Dees,”theelectronexitsthedevice.So,theradius
of the “Dees” places an upper limit on the radius and, therefore, the momentum and energy of the accelerated
particle.Theexitmomentumoftheparticleisdeterminedusingtheradiusoforbitandstrengthofthemagnetic
field. The exit energy of the particle can be determined the particle momentum (Relativity).
Solution
Assuming no energy losses, the momentum of the particle in the cyclotron is
p=0.3Br =0.3(1.5T⎞⎛1.2m⎞=0.543GeV/c.
⎠⎝ ⎠
Themomentumenergy pc2=0.543GeV=543MeV ismuchlargerthantherestmassenergyoftheelectron,
mc2=0.511MeV, sorelativisticexpressionfortheenergyoftheelectronmustbeused(seeRelativity).The
total energy of the electron is
E = (pc)2+(mc2)2= (543)2+(0.511)2≈543MeVand
total
K =E
total
−mc2=543GeV−0.511GeV≈543MeV.
Significance
Thetotalenergyoftheelectronismuchlargerthanitsrestmassenergy.Inotherwords,thetotalenergyofthe
electronisalmostallintheformofkineticenergy.Cyclotronscanbeusedtoconductnuclearphysicsexperiments
or in particle therapy to treat cancer.
11.6 Check Your Understanding A charged particle of a certain momentum travels in an arc through a
uniform magnetic field. What happens if the magnetic field is doubled?
Colliding Beam Machines
New particles can be created by colliding particles at high energies. According to Einstein’s mass-energy relation, the
energies of the colliding particles are converted into mass energy of the created particle. The most efficient way to do
thisiswithparticle-colliding beammachines.Acollidingbeammachinecreatestwocounter-rotatingbeamsinacircular
accelerator,storesthebeamsatconstantenergy,andthenatthedesiredmoment,focusesthebeamsononeanotheratthe
center of a sensitive detector.
TheprototypicalcollidingbeammachineistheCornellElectronStorageRing,locatedinIthaca,NewYork(Figure11.8).
Electrons(e−)andpositrons(e + )arecreatedatthebeginningofthelinearacceleratorandareacceleratedupto150MeV.
Theparticlesaretheninjectedintotheinnersynchrotronring,wheretheyareacceleratedbyRFcavitiesto4.5to6GeV.
When the beams are up to speed, they are transferred and “stored” in an outer storage ring at the same energy. The two
counter-rotatingbeamstravelthroughthesameevacuatedpipe,butarekeptapartuntilcollisionsaredesired.Theelectrons
and positrons circle the machine in bunches 390,000 times every second.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 525
Figure 11.8 The Cornell Electron Storage Ring uses a linear accelerator and
a synchrotron to accelerate electrons and positrons to 4.5–6 GeV. The particles
are held in the outer storage ring at that energy until they are made to collide
in a particle detector. (credit: modification of work by Laboratory of Nuclear
Studies, Cornell Electron Storage Ring)
Whenanelectronandpositroncollide,theyannihilateeachothertoproduceaphoton,whichexistsfortooshortatimeto
bedetected.Thephotonproduceseitheraleptonpair(e.g.,anelectronandposition,muonorantimuon,ortauandantitau)
oraquarkpair.Ifquarksareproduced,mesonsform,suchas c−c and b − b. Thesemesonsarecreatednearlyatrestsincethe
initialtotalmomentumoftheelectron-positronsystemiszero.Note,mesonscannotbecreatedatjustanycollidingenergy
butonlyat“resonant”energiesthatcorrespondtotheuniquemassesofthemesons(Table 11.5).Themesonscreatedin
thiswayarehighlyunstableanddecayquicklyintolighterparticles,suchaselectrons,protons,andphotons.Thecollision
“fragments” provide valuable information about particle interactions.
Asthefieldofparticlephysicsadvances,collidingbeammachinesarebecomingmorepowerful.TheLargeHadronCollider
(LHC), currently the largest accelerator in the world, collides protons at beam energies exceeding 6 TeV. The center-of-
mass energy (W) refers to the total energy available to create new particles in a colliding machine, or the total energy of
incomingparticlesinthecenter-of-massframe.(Theconceptofacenter-of-massframeofreferenceisdiscussedinLinear
Momentum and Collisions (http://cnx.org/content/m58317/latest/) .)Therefore,theLHCisabletoproduceone
or more particles with a total mass exceeding 12 TeV. The center-of-mass energy is given by:
2 2 (11.3)
W2=2⎡E E +(p c)(p c)⎤+(m c2) +(m c2) ,
⎣ 1 2 1 2 ⎦ 1 2
where E and E are the total energies of the incoming particles (1 and 2), p and p are the magnitudes of their
1 2 1 2
momenta, and m and m are their rest masses.
1 2