# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 343-348
############################################################

Chapter 7 | Electric Potential 333
CHAPTER 7 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
electric dipole system of two equal but opposite charges a fixed distance apart
electric dipole moment quantitydefinedas → p =q → d foralldipoles,wherethevectorpointsfromthenegativeto
positive charge
electric potential potential energy per unit charge
electric potential difference thechangeinpotentialenergyofachargeqmovedbetweentwopoints,dividedbythe
charge.
electric potential energy potential energy stored in a system of charged objects due to the charges
electron-volt energy given to a fundamental charge accelerated through a potential difference of one volt
electrostatic precipitators filters that apply charges to particles in the air, then attract those charges to a filter,
removing them from the airstream
equipotential line two-dimensional representation of an equipotential surface
equipotential surface surface (usually in three dimensions) on which all points are at the same potential
grounding process of attaching a conductor to the earth to ensure that there is no potential difference between it and
Earth
ink jet printer smallinkdropletssprayedwithanelectricchargearecontrolledbyelectrostaticplatestocreateimageson
paper
photoconductor substance that is an insulator until it is exposed to light, when it becomes a conductor
Van de Graaff generator machine that produces a large amount of excess charge, used for experiments with high
voltage
voltage changeinpotentialenergyofachargemovedfromonepointtoanother,dividedbythecharge;unitsofpotential
difference are joules per coulomb, known as volt
xerography dry copying process based on electrostatics
KEY EQUATIONS
Potential energy of a two-charge system qQ
U(r)=k
r
Work done to assemble a system of charges N N q q
W 12⋯N =
2
k∑∑
r
i
ij
j
fori≠ j
i j
Potential difference ΔV = Δ q U orΔU =qΔV
Electric potential U P→ →
V = q = −∫ E ⋅d l
R
Potential difference between two points B→ →
ΔV BA=V B−V A=−∫ E ·d l
A
Electric potential of a point charge kq
V = r
Electric potential of a system of point charges N
q
V P=k∑
r
i
i
1

334 Chapter 7 | Electric Potential
Electric dipole moment → →
p =q d
Electric potential due to a dipole → ^
p · r
V P=k
r2
Electric potential of a continuous charge distribution dq
V P=k∫
r
Electric field components E x= − ∂
∂
V
x
, E y= − ∂
∂
V
y
, E z= − ∂
∂
V
z
Del operator in Cartesian coordinates → ^ ∂ ^ ∂ ^ ∂
∇ = i + j + k
∂x ∂y ∂z
Electric field as gradient of potential → →
E =− ∇ V
Del operator in cylindrical coordinates → ∇ = ^ r ∂ ∂ r + φ ^1 r ∂ ∂ φ + ^ z ∂ ∂ z
Del operator in spherical coordinates → ∇ = ^ r ∂ ∂ r + ^ θ1 r ∂ ∂ θ + φ ^ rs 1 inθ ∂ ∂ φ
SUMMARY
7.1Electric Potential Energy
• TheworkdonetomoveachargefrompointAtoBinanelectricfieldispathindependent,andtheworkarounda
closed path is zero. Therefore, the electric field and electric force are conservative.
qQ
• Wecandefineanelectricpotentialenergy,whichbetweenpointchargesis U(r)=k
r
,withthezeroreference
taken to be at infinity.
• Thesuperpositionprincipleholdsforelectricpotentialenergy;thepotentialenergyofasystemofmultiplecharges
is the sum of the potential energies of the individual pairs.
7.2Electric Potential and Potential Difference
• Electric potential is potential energy per unit charge.
• ThepotentialdifferencebetweenpointsAandB, V B−V A, thatis,thechangeinpotentialofachargeqmoved
fromAtoB, is equal to the change in potential energy divided by the charge.
• Potential difference is commonly called voltage, represented by the symbol ΔV:
ΔV = Δ q U orΔU =qΔV.
• Anelectron-voltistheenergygiventoafundamentalchargeacceleratedthroughapotentialdifferenceof1V.In
equation form,
⎛ −19 ⎞ ⎛ −19 ⎞ −19
1eV= 1.60×10 C(1V)= 1.60× 10 C(1J/C)=1.60×10 J.
⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
7.3Calculations of Electric Potential
• Electric potential is a scalar whereas electric field is a vector.
• Addition of voltages as numbers gives the voltage due to a combination of point charges, allowing us to use the
N
q
principle of superposition: V P=k∑
r
i.
i
1
• An electric dipole consists of two equal and opposite charges a fixed distance apart, with a dipole moment
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 7 | Electric Potential 335
→ p =q → d .
dq
• Continuous charge distributions may be calculated with V P=k∫
r
.
7.4Determining Field from Potential
• Justaswemayintegrateovertheelectricfieldtocalculatethepotential,wemaytakethederivativeofthepotential
to calculate the electric field.
• Thismaybedoneforindividualcomponentsoftheelectricfield,orwemaycalculatetheentireelectricfieldvector
with the gradient operator.
7.5Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
• Anequipotentialsurfaceisthecollectionofpointsinspacethatareallatthesamepotential.Equipotentiallinesare
the two-dimensional representation of equipotential surfaces.
• Equipotential surfaces are always perpendicular to electric field lines.
• Conductors in static equilibrium are equipotential surfaces.
• Topographic maps may be thought of as showing gravitational equipotential lines.
7.6Applications of Electrostatics
• Electrostatics is the study of electric fields in static equilibrium.
• In addition to research using equipment such as a Van de Graaff generator, many practical applications of
electrostatics exist, including photocopiers, laser printers, ink jet printers, and electrostatic air filters.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
difference?
7.1Electric Potential Energy
1. Would electric potential energy be meaningful if the 8. If the voltage between two points is zero, can a test
electric field were not conservative? charge be moved between them with zero net work being
done? Can this necessarily be done without exerting a
force? Explain.
2. Whydoweneedtobecarefulaboutworkdoneonthe
system versus work donebythe system in calculations?
9. What is the relationship between voltage and energy?
More precisely, what is the relationship between potential
3. Doestheorderinwhichweassembleasystemofpoint
difference and electric potential energy?
charges affect the total work done?
10. Voltages are always measured between two points.
Why?
7.2Electric Potential and Potential Difference
4. Discuss how potential difference and electric field
11. Howareunitsofvoltsandelectron-voltsrelated?How
strength are related. Give an example.
do they differ?
5. What is the strength of the electric field in a region
12. Can a particle move in a direction of increasing
where the electric potential is constant?
electric potential, yet have its electric potential energy
decrease? Explain
6. If a proton is released from rest in an electric field,
will it move in the direction of increasing or decreasing
potential? Also answer this question for an electron and a
7.3Calculations of Electric Potential
neutron. Explain why.
13. Comparetheelectricdipolemomentsofcharges ±Q
7. Voltage is the common word for potential difference. separatedbyadistancedandcharges ±Q/2 separatedby
Which term is more descriptive, voltage or potential
a distanced/2.

336 Chapter 7 | Electric Potential
14. Would Gauss’s law be helpful for determining the 21. Is the electric potential necessarily constant over the
electric field of a dipole? Why? surface of a conductor?
15. In what region of space is the potential due to a 22. Underelectrostaticconditions,theexcesschargeona
uniformly charged sphere the same as that of a point conductorresidesonitssurface.Doesthismeanthatallof
charge? In what region does it differ from that of a point the conduction electrons in a conductor are on the surface?
charge?
23. Can a positively charged conductor be at a negative
16. Canthepotentialofanonuniformlychargedspherebe potential? Explain.
the same as that of a point charge? Explain.
24. Can equipotential surfaces intersect?
7.4Determining Field from Potential
17. If the electric field is zero throughout a region, must 7.6Applications of Electrostatics
the electric potential also be zero in that region? 25. Why are the metal support rods for satellite network
dishes generally grounded?
→
18. Explain why knowledge of E (x, y, z) is not
26. (a)Whyarefishreasonablysafeinanelectricalstorm?
sufficient todetermine V(x,y,z).What about the other way
(b)Whyareswimmersnonethelessorderedtogetoutofthe
around?
water in the same circumstance?
27. Whatarethesimilaritiesanddifferencesbetweenthe
7.5Equipotential Surfaces and Conductors
processes in a photocopier and an electrostatic
19. If two points are at the same potential, are there any precipitator?
electric field lines connecting them?
28. About what magnitude of potential is used to charge
20. Suppose you have a map of equipotential surfaces the drum of a photocopy machine? A web search for
spaced 1.0 V apart. What do the distances between the “xerography” may be of use.
surfacesinaparticularregiontellyouaboutthestrengthof
→
the E in that region?
PROBLEMS
31. Toformahydrogenatom,aprotonisfixedatapoint
7.1Electric Potential Energy and an electron is brought from far away to a distance of
29. Consideracharge Q (+5.0µC) fixedatasitewith 0.529×10 −10 m, the average distance between proton
1
another charge Q (charge +3.0µC, mass 6.0µg) andelectroninahydrogenatom.Howmuchworkisdone?
2
movingintheneighboringspace.(a)Evaluatethepotential
32. (a) What is the average power output of a heart
energyof Q whenitis4.0cmfrom Q . (b)If Q starts
2 1 2 defibrillator that dissipates 400 J of energy in 10.0 ms?
fromrestfromapoint4.0cmfrom Q , whatwill beits (b) Considering the high-power output, why doesn’t the
1
speedwhenitis8.0cmfrom Q ?(Note: Q isheldfixed defibrillator produce serious burns?
1 1
in its place.)
7.2Electric Potential and Potential Difference
30. Two charges Q (+2.00µC) and Q (+2.00µC)
1 2 33. Findtheratioofspeedsofanelectronandanegative
are placed symmetrically along the x-axis at
hydrogen ion (one having an extra electron) accelerated
x= ±3.00cm. Consider a charge Q
3
of charge
through the same voltage, assuming non-relativistic final
+4.00µC and mass 10.0 mg moving along the y-axis. speeds. Take the mass of the hydrogen ion to be
−27
If Q starts from rest at y=2.00cm, what is its speed 1.67×10 kg.
3
when it reaches y=4.00cm?
34. Anevacuatedtubeusesanacceleratingvoltageof40
kVtoaccelerateelectronstohitacopperplateandproduce
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 7 | Electric Potential 337
X-rays. Non-relativistically, what would be the maximum
speed of these electrons?
35. Show that units of V/m and N/C for electric field
strength are indeed equivalent.
36. What is the strength of the electric field between
two parallel conducting plates separated by 1.00 cm and
having a potential difference (voltage) between them of
44. Singly charged gas ions are accelerated from rest
1.50×104 V?
through a voltage of 13.0 V. At what temperature will the
averagekineticenergyofgasmoleculesbethesameasthat
37. The electric field strength between two parallel given these ions?
conducting plates separated by 4.00 cm is
7.50×104 V/m. (a) What is the potential difference
7.3Calculations of Electric Potential
betweentheplates?(b)Theplatewiththelowestpotential
istakentobezerovolts.Whatisthepotential1.00cmfrom 45. A 0.500-cm-diameter plastic sphere, used in a static
that plate and 3.00 cm from the other? electricity demonstration, has a uniformly distributed
40.0-pCchargeonitssurface.Whatisthepotentialnearits
surface?
38. Thevoltageacrossamembraneformingacellwallis
80.0 mV and the membrane is 9.00 nm thick. What is the
electricfieldstrength?(Thevalueissurprisinglylarge,but 46. Howfarfroma 1.00-µC pointchargeisthepotential
correct.) You may assume a uniform electric field.
100 V? At what distance is it 2.00×102 V?
39. Two parallel conducting plates are separated by 10.0
cm,andoneofthemistakentobeatzerovolts.(a)What 47. Ifthepotentialduetoapointchargeis 5.00×102 V
is the electric field strength between them, if the potential atadistanceof15.0m,whatarethesignandmagnitudeof
8.00 cm from the zero volt plate (and 2.00 cm from the the charge?
other) is 450 V? (b) What is the voltage between the
plates?
48. Innuclearfission,anucleussplitsroughlyinhalf.(a)
What is the potential 2.00×10−14 m from a fragment
40. Find the maximum potential difference between two
thathas46protonsinit?(b)Whatisthepotentialenergyin
parallel conducting plates separated by 0.500 cm of air,
MeV of a similarly charged fragment at this distance?
giventhemaximumsustainableelectricfieldstrengthinair
to be 3.0×10 6 V/m.
49. A research Van de Graaff generator has a 2.00-m-
diameter metal sphere with a charge of 5.00 mC on it. (a)
41. An electron is to be accelerated in a uniform electric Whatisthepotentialnearitssurface?(b)Atwhatdistance
field having a strength of 2.00×10 6 V/m. (a) What from its center is the potential 1.00 MV? (c) An oxygen
atomwiththreemissingelectronsisreleasedneartheVan
energy in keV is given to the electron if it is accelerated
de Graaff generator. What is its energy in MeV when the
through0.400m?(b)Overwhatdistancewouldithaveto
atom is at the distance found in part b?
be accelerated to increase its energy by 50.0 GeV?
50. Anelectrostaticpaintsprayerhasa0.200-m-diameter
42. Use the definition of potential difference in terms of
metal sphere at a potential of 25.0 kV that repels paint
electricfieldtodeducetheformulaforpotentialdifference
droplets onto a grounded object.
between r =r
a
and r =r
b
for a point charge located at
(a)What chargeisonthesphere? (b)What chargemusta
the origin. Hereris the spherical radial coordinate.
0.100-mg drop of paint have to arrive at the object with a
speed of 10.0 m/s?
43. The electric field in a region is pointed away from
the z-axis and the magnitude depends upon the distance s
51. (a) What is the potential between two points situated
fromtheaxis.Themagnitudeoftheelectricfieldisgivenas
E= α
s
where α isaconstant.Findthepotentialdifference 10cmand20cmfroma 3.0-µC pointcharge?(b)Towhat
locationshouldthepointat20cmbemovedtoincreasethis
betweenpoints P andP ,explicitlystatingthepathover
1 2 potential difference by a factor of two?
which you conduct the integration for the line integral.
52. Find the potential at points P , P , P , andP in
1 2 3 4