# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 194-198
############################################################

182 4 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
acceleration vector instantaneous acceleration reference frame coordinate system in which the
found by taking the derivative of the velocity position, velocity, and acceleration of an object at
function with respect to time in unit vector notation rest or moving is measured
angular frequency rate of change of an angle with relative velocity velocity of an object as observed
which an object that is moving on a circular path from a particular reference frame, or the velocity of
centripetal acceleration component of acceleration one reference frame with respect to another
of an object moving in a circle that is directed reference frame
radially inward toward the center of the circle tangential acceleration magnitude of which is the
displacement vector vector from the initial position time rate of change of speed. Its direction is tangent
to a final position on a trajectory of a particle to the circle.
position vector vector from the origin of a chosen time of flight elapsed time a projectile is in the air
coordinate system to the position of a particle in total acceleration vector sum of centripetal and
two- or three-dimensional space tangential accelerations
projectile motion motion of an object subject only to trajectory path of a projectile through the air
the acceleration of gravity velocity vector vector that gives the instantaneous
range maximum horizontal distance a projectile speed and direction of a particle; tangent to the
travels trajectory
Key Equations
Position vector
Displacement vector
Velocity vector
Velocity in terms of components
Velocity components
Average velocity
Instantaneous acceleration
Instantaneous acceleration, component form
Instantaneous acceleration as second
derivatives of position
Time of flight
Trajectory
Range
Centripetal acceleration
Position vector, uniform circular motion
Velocity vector, uniform circular motion
Acceleration vector, uniform circular motion
Tangential acceleration
Total acceleration
Access for free at openstax.org

4 • Chapter Review 183
Position vector in frame
S is the position
vector in frame plus the vector from the
origin of S to the origin of
Relative velocity equation connecting two
reference frames
Relative velocity equation connecting more
than two reference frames
Relative acceleration equation
Summary
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors • The kinematic equations for constant
acceleration can be written as the vector sum of
• The position function gives the position as a
the constant acceleration equations in the x, y,
function of time of a particle moving in two or
and z directions.
three dimensions. Graphically, it is a vector from
the origin of a chosen coordinate system to the 4.3 Projectile Motion
point where the particle is located at a specific
• Projectile motion is the motion of an object
time.
subject only to the acceleration of gravity, where
• The displacement vector gives the shortest
the acceleration is constant, as near the surface
distance between any two points on the
of Earth.
trajectory of a particle in two or three
• To solve projectile motion problems, we analyze
dimensions.
the motion of the projectile in the horizontal and
• Instantaneous velocity gives the speed and
vertical directions using the one-dimensional
direction of a particle at a specific time on its
kinematic equations for x and y.
trajectory in two or three dimensions, and is a
• The time of flight of a projectile launched with
vector in two and three dimensions.
initial vertical velocity on an even surface is
• The velocity vector is tangent to the trajectory of
given by
the particle.
• Displacement can be written as a vector sum
of the one-dimensional displacements
along the x, y, and z directions. This equation is valid only when the projectile
• Velocity can be written as a vector sum of lands at the same elevation from which it was
the one-dimensional velocities launched.
along the x, y, and z directions. • The maximum horizontal distance traveled by a
• Motion in any given direction is independent of projectile is called the range. Again, the equation
motion in a perpendicular direction. for range is valid only when the projectile lands at
the same elevation from which it was launched.
4.2 Acceleration Vector
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
• In two and three dimensions, the acceleration
vector can have an arbitrary direction and does • Uniform circular motion is motion in a circle at
not necessarily point along a given component of constant speed.
the velocity. • Centripetal acceleration is the acceleration a
• The instantaneous acceleration is produced by a particle must have to follow a circular path.
change in velocity taken over a very short Centripetal acceleration always points toward
(infinitesimal) time period. Instantaneous the center of rotation and has magnitude
acceleration is a vector in two or three
dimensions. It is found by taking the derivative of • Nonuniform circular motion occurs when there is
the velocity function with respect to time. tangential acceleration of an object executing
• In three dimensions, acceleration can be circular motion such that the speed of the object
written as a vector sum of the one-dimensional is changing. This acceleration is called tangential
accelerations along the x-, acceleration The magnitude of tangential
y-, and z-axes. acceleration is the time rate of change of the

184 4 • Chapter Review
magnitude of the velocity. The tangential reference frame in terms of position, velocity,
acceleration vector is tangential to the circle, and acceleration needs to be specified.
whereas the centripetal acceleration vector • Relative velocity is the velocity of an object as
points radially inward toward the center of the observed from a particular reference frame, and
circle. The total acceleration is the vector sum of it varies with the choice of reference frame.
tangential and centripetal accelerations. • If S and are two reference frames moving
• An object executing uniform circular motion can relative to each other at a constant velocity, then
be described with equations of motion. The the velocity of an object relative to S is equal to
position vector of the object is its velocity relative to plus the velocity of
where A is the relative to S.
magnitude which is also the radius of the • If two reference frames are moving relative to
circle, and is the angular frequency. each other at a constant velocity, then the
accelerations of an object as observed in both
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
reference frames are equal.
• When analyzing motion of an object, the
Conceptual Questions
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors time other than at t = 0?
1 . What form does the trajectory of a particle have 8 . Answer the following questions for projectile
if the distance from any point A to point B is motion on level ground assuming negligible air
equal to the magnitude of the displacement resistance, with the initial angle being neither
from A to B? nor (a) Is the acceleration ever zero? (b) Is
the vector ever parallel or antiparallel to the
2 . Give an example of a trajectory in two or three
vector ? (c) Is the vector v ever perpendicular
dimensions caused by independent
to the vector a? If so, where is this located?
perpendicular motions.
9 . A dime is placed at the edge of a table so it
3 . If the instantaneous velocity is zero, what can be
hangs over slightly. A quarter is slid horizontally
said about the slope of the position function?
on the table surface perpendicular to the edge
4.2 Acceleration Vector and hits the dime head on. Which coin hits the
ground first?
4 . If the position function of a particle is a linear
function of time, what can be said about its 4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
acceleration?
10 . Can centripetal acceleration change the speed
5 . If an object has a constant x-component of the of a particle undergoing circular motion?
velocity and suddenly experiences an
11 . Can tangential acceleration change the speed of
acceleration in the y direction, does the
a particle undergoing circular motion?
x-component of its velocity change?
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
6 . If an object has a constant x-component of
velocity and suddenly experiences an 12 . What frame or frames of reference do you use
acceleration at an angle of in the x direction, instinctively when driving a car? When flying in a
does the x-component of velocity change? commercial jet?
4.3 Projectile Motion 13 . A basketball player dribbling down the court
usually keeps his eyes fixed on the players
7 . Answer the following questions for projectile
around him. He is moving fast. Why doesn’t he
motion on level ground assuming negligible air
need to keep his eyes on the ball?
resistance, with the initial angle being neither
nor (a) Is the velocity ever zero? (b) When 14 . If someone is riding in the back of a pickup truck
is the velocity a minimum? A maximum? (c) Can and throws a softball straight backward, is it
the velocity ever be the same as the initial possible for the ball to fall straight down as
velocity at a time other than at t = 0? (d) Can the viewed by a person standing at the side of the
speed ever be the same as the initial speed at a road? Under what condition would this occur?
Access for free at openstax.org

4 • Chapter Review 185
How would the motion of the ball appear to the 16 . A clod of dirt falls from the bed of a moving
person who threw it? truck. It strikes the ground directly below the
end of the truck. (a) What is the direction of its
15 . The hat of a jogger running at constant velocity
velocity relative to the truck just before it hits?
falls off the back of his head. Draw a sketch
(b) Is this the same as the direction of its
showing the path of the hat in the jogger’s frame
velocity relative to ground just before it hits?
of reference. Draw its path as viewed by a
Explain your answers.
stationary observer. Neglect air resistance.
Problems
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
17 . The coordinates of a particle in a rectangular
coordinate system are (1.0, –4.0, 6.0). What is
the position vector of the particle?
18 . The position of a particle changes from
​ to
What is the particle’s
displacement?
19 . The 18th hole at Pebble Beach Golf Course is a
dogleg to the left of length 496.0 m. The fairway
off the tee is taken to be the x direction. A golfer
hits his tee shot a distance of 300.0 m,
corresponding to a displacement 23 . The position of a particle is
and hits his second shot 189.0 (a) What is the
m with a displacement velocity of the particle at 0 s and at s? (b)
What is the final What is the average velocity between 0 s and
displacement of the golf ball from where it s?
started?
24 . Clay Matthews, a linebacker for the Green Bay
20 . A bird flies straight northeast a distance of 95.0 Packers, can reach a speed of 10.0 m/s. At the
km for 3.0 h. With the x-axis due east and the start of a play, Matthews runs downfield at
y-axis due north, what is the displacement in with respect to the 50-yard line and covers 8.0
unit vector notation for the bird? What is the m in 1 s. He then runs straight down the field at
average velocity for the trip? with respect to the 50-yard line for 12 m,
with an elapsed time of 1.2 s. (a) What is
21 . A cyclist rides 5.0 km due east, then 10.0 km
Matthews’ final displacement from the start of
west of north. From this point she rides 8.0
the play? (b) What is his average velocity?
km due west. What is the final displacement
from where the cyclist started? 25 . The F-35B Lighting II is a short-takeoff and
vertical landing fighter jet. If it does a vertical
22 . New York Rangers defenseman Daniel Girardi
takeoff to 20.00-m height above the ground and
stands at the goal and passes a hockey puck 20
then follows a flight path angled at with
m and from straight down the ice to left wing
respect to the ground for 20.00 km, what is the
Chris Kreider waiting at the blue line. Kreider
final displacement?
waits for Girardi to reach the blue line and
passes the puck directly across the ice to him 10 4.2 Acceleration Vector
m away. What is the final displacement of the
26 . The position of a particle is
puck? See the following figure.
(a) Determine
its velocity and acceleration as functions of time.
(b) What are its velocity and acceleration at time
t = 0?
27 . A particle’s acceleration is At