# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 547-554
############################################################

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 539
The Early Universe
Before the short period of cosmic inflation, cosmologists believe that all matter in the universe was squeezed into a
space much smaller than an atom. Cosmologists further believe that the universe was extremely dense and hot, and
interactionsbetweenparticlesweregovernedbyasingleforce.Inotherwords,thefourfundamentalforces(strongnuclear,
electromagnetic, weak nuclear, and gravitational) merge into one at these energies (Figure 11.21). How and why this
“unity” breaks down at lower energies is an important unsolved problem in physics.
Figure 11.21 The separation of the four fundamental forces in the early universe.
Scientific models of the early universe are highly speculative. Figure 11.22 shows a sketch of one possible timeline of
events.
Figure 11.22 An approximate timeline for the evolution of the universe from the Big Bang to the present.
1. Big Bang ⎛t<10 −43 s ⎞ : The current laws of physics break down. At the end of the initial Big Bang event, the
⎝ ⎠
temperature of the universe is approximately T =10 32 K.

540 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
2. Inflationary phase ⎛t=10 −43 to 10 −35 s ⎞ : The universe expands exponentially, and gravity separates from the
⎝ ⎠
other forces. The universe cools to approximately T =10 27 K.
3. Age of leptons ⎛t=10 −35 to 10 −6 s ⎞ : As the universe continues to expand, the strong nuclear force separates
⎝ ⎠
from the electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces (or electroweak force). Soon after, the weak nuclear force
separatesfromtheelectromagneticforce.Theuniverseisahotsoupofquarks,leptons,photons,andotherparticles.
4. Ageofnucleons ⎛t=10 −6 to 225 s ⎞ : Theuniverseconsistsofleptonsandhadrons(suchasprotons,neutrons,and
⎝ ⎠
mesons)inthermalequilibrium.Pairproductionandpairannihilationoccurswithequalease,sophotonsremainin
thermal equilibrium:
γ+γ ↔e−+e +
−
γ+γ ↔p+p
−
γ+γ ↔ n+n.
The number of protons is approximately equal to the number of neutrons through interactions with neutrinos:
ν e+n ↔e−+p
−ν
e+p ↔e
+
+n.
The temperature of the universe settles to approximately 1011K —much too cool for the continued production
ofnucleon-antinucleonpairs.Thenumbersofprotonsandneutronsbegintodominateovertheiranti-particles,so
proton-antiproton ⎛p − p⎞ andneutron-antineutron(n − n)annihilationsdecline.Deuterons(proton-neutronpairs)begin
⎝ ⎠
to form.
5. Ageofnucleosynthesis(t=225s to1000years):Astheuniversecontinuestoexpand,deuteronsreactwithprotons
and neutrons to form larger nuclei; these larger nuclei react with protons and neutrons to form still larger nuclei.
At the end of this period, about 1/4 of the mass of the universe is helium. (This explains the current amount of
heliumintheuniverse.)Photonslacktheenergytocontinueelectron-positronproduction,soelectronsandpositrons
annihilate each other to photons only.
6. Ageofions(t=1000 to3000years):Theuniverseishotenoughtoionizeanyatomsformed.Theuniverseconsists
of electrons, positrons, protons, light nuclei, and photons.
7. Age of atoms (t=3000 to 300,000 years): The universe cools below 10 5 K and atoms form. Photons do not
interactstronglywithneutralatoms,sothey“decouple”(separate)fromatoms.Thesephotonsconstitutethecosmic
microwave background radiationto be discussed later.
8. Ageofstarsandgalaxies(t=300,000 yearstopresent):Theatomsandparticlesarepulledtogetherbygravity
and form large lumps. The atoms and particles in stars undergo nuclear fusion reaction.
Watch thisvideo (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21bigbang)to learn more about Big Bang cosmology.
Todescribetheconditionsoftheearlyuniversequantitatively,recalltherelationshipbetweentheaveragethermalenergy
of particle (E) in a system of interacting particles and equilibrium temperature (T) of that system:
E=k
B
T, (11.16)
where k is Boltzmann’s constant. In the hot conditions of the early universe, particle energies were unimaginably large.
B
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 541
Example 11.9
What Was the Average Thermal Energy of a Particle just after the Big Bang?
Strategy
The average thermal energy of a particle in a system of interacting particles depends on the equilibrium
temperature of that systemEquation 11.1. We are given this approximate temperature in the above timeline.
Solution
Cosmologists think the temperature of the universe just after the Big Bang was approximately T =10 32 K.
Therefore, the average thermal energy of a particle would have been
k T ≈(10−4 eV/K)(10 32 K)=10 28 eV = 10 19 GeV.
B
Significance
This energy is many orders of magnitude larger than particle energies produced by human-made particle
accelerators. Currently, these accelerators operate at energies less than 104 GeV.
11.9 Check Your Understanding Compare the abundance of helium by mass 10,000 years after the Big
Bang and now.
Nucleonsformatenergiesapproximatelyequaltotherestmassofaproton,or1000MeV.Thetemperaturecorresponding
to this energy is therefore
T = 1000MeV =1.2×10 13 K.
8.62×1011 MeV·K−1
Temperaturesofthisvalueorhigherexistedwithinthefirstsecondoftheearlyuniverse.Asimilaranalysiscanbedonefor
atoms.Atomsformatanenergyequaltotheionizationenergyofground-statehydrogen(13eV).Theeffectivetemperature
for atom formation is therefore
T = 13eV =1.6×10 5 K.
8.62×10 5 eV·K−1
This occurs well after the four fundamental forces have separated, including forces necessary to bind the protons and
neutrons in the nucleus (strong nuclear force), and bind electrons to the nucleus (electromagnetic force).
Nucleosynthesis of Light Elements
Therelativeabundancesofthelightelementshydrogen,helium,lithium,andberylliumintheuniverseprovidekeyevidence
for the Big Bang. The data suggest that much of the helium in the universe is primordial. For instance, it turns out that
that 25% of the matter in the universe is helium, which is too high an abundance and cannot be explained based on the
production of helium in stars.
How much of the elements in the universe were created in the Big Bang? If you run the clock backward, the universe
becomes more and more compressed, and hotter and hotter. Eventually, temperatures are reached that permit
nucleosynthesis,theperiodofformationofnuclei,similartowhatoccursatthecoreoftheSun.BigBangnucleosynthesis
is believed to have occurred within a few hundred seconds of the Big Bang.
HowdidBigBangnucleosynthesisoccur?Atfirst,protonsandneutronscombinedtoformdeuterons, 2H.Thedeuteron
capturedaneutrontoformtriton, 3 H —thenucleusoftheradioactive hydrogencalledtritium.Deuteronsalsocaptured
protonstomakehelium 3 He.When 3 H capturesaprotonor 3 He capturesaneutron,helium 4He results.Atthisstage
intheBigBang,theratioofprotonstoneutronswasabout7:1.Thus,theprocessofconversionto 4He usedupalmost
all neutrons. The process lasted about 3 minutes and almost 25% of all the matter turned into 4He, along with small
percentagesof 2H, 3 H,and 3 He.Tinyamountsof 7 Li and 7 Be werealsoformed.Theexpansionduringthistime

542 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
cooled the universe enough that the nuclear reactions stopped. The abundances of the light nuclei 2H, 4He, and 7 Li
created after the Big Bang are very dependent on the matter density.
The predicted abundances of the elements in the universe provide a stringent test of the Big Bang and the Big Bang
nucleosynthesis. Recent experimental estimates of the matter density from the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe
(WMAP)agree with model predictions. This agreement provides convincing evidence of the Big Bang model.
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation
According to cosmological models, the Big Bang event should have left behind thermal radiation called the cosmic
microwave background radiation (CMBR). The intensity of this radiation should follow the blackbody radiation curve
(Photons and Matter Waves). Wien’s law states that the wavelength of the radiation at peak intensity is
−3 (11.17)
λ max= 2.898×1
T
0 m-K ,
where T is temperature in kelvins. Scientists expected the expansion of the universe to “stretch the light,” and the
temperature to be very low, so cosmic background radiation should be long-wavelength and low energy.
Inthe1960s,ArnoPenziasandRobertWilsonofBellLaboratoriesnoticedthatnomatterwhattheydid,theycouldnotget
ridofafaintbackgroundnoiseintheirsatellitecommunicationsystem.Thenoisewasduetoradiationwithwavelengths
inthecentimeterrange(themicrowaveregion).Later,thisnoisewasassociatedwiththecosmicbackgroundradiation.An
intensity map of the cosmic background radiation appears in Figure 11.23. The thermal spectrum is modeled well by a
blackbody curve that corresponds to a temperature T =2.7K (Figure 11.24).
Figure 11.23 This map of the sky uses color to show fluctuations, or wrinkles, in the cosmic
microwave background observed with the WMAP spacecraft. The Milky Way has been removed
for clarity. Red represents higher temperature and higher density, whereas blue indicates lower
temperature and density. This map does not contradict the earlier claim of smoothness because
the largest fluctuations are only one part in one million. (credit: NASA/WMAP Science Team)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 543
Figure 11.24 Intensity distribution of cosmic microwave background radiation. The model predictions (the line) agree
extremely well with the experimental results (the dots). Frequency and brightness values are shown on a log axis. (credit:
modification of work by George Smoot/NASA COBE Project)
Theformationofatomsintheearlyuniversemakestheseatomslesslikelytointeractwithlight.Therefore,photonsthat
belongtothecosmicbackgroundradiationmusthaveseparatedfrommatteratatemperatureTassociatedwith1eV(the
approximate ionization energy of an atom) . The temperature of the universe at this point was
k T∼1 eV⇒T = 1 eV ∼104 K.
B 5
8.617×10 eV/K
Accordingtocosmologicalmodels,thetimewhenphotonslastscatteredoffchargedparticleswasapproximately380,000
years after the Big Bang. Before that time, matter in the universe was in the plasma form and the photons were
“thermalized.”
Antimatter and Matter
We know from direct observation that antimatter is rare. Earth and the solar system are nearly pure matter, and most
of the universe also seems dominated by matter. This is proven by the lack of annihilation radiation coming to us from
space,particularlytherelativeabsenceof0.511-MeV γ rayscreatedbythemutualannihilationofelectronsandpositrons.
(Antimatterinnatureiscreatedinparticlecollisionsandin β+ decays,butonlyinsmallamountsthatquicklyannihilate,
leaving almost pure matter surviving.)
Despitetheobserveddominanceofmatteroverantimatterintheuniverse,theStandardModelofparticleinteractionsand
experimental measurement suggests only small differences in the ways that matter and antimatter interact. For example,
neutralkaondecaysproduceonlyslightlymorematterthanantimatter.Yet,ifthroughsuchdecay,slightlymorematterthan
antimatterwasproducedintheearlyuniverse,therestcouldannihilatepairbypair,leavingmostlyordinarymattertoform
thestarsandgalaxies.Inthisway,thevastnumberofstarsweobservemaybeonlyatinyremnantoftheoriginalmatter
created in the Big Bang.

544 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Dark Matter and Dark Energy
Inthelasttwodecades,newandmorepowerfultechniqueshaverevealedthattheuniverseisfilledwithdarkmatter.This
typeofmatterisinterestingandimportantbecause,currently,scientistsdonotknowwhatitis!However,wecaninferits
existencebythedeflectionofdistantstarlight.Forexample,iflightfromadistantgalaxyisbentbythegravitationalfield
of a clump of dark matter between us and the galaxy, it is possible that two images of the same galaxy can be produced
(Figure11.25).Thebendingoflightbythegravitationalfieldofmatteriscalledgravitationallensing.Insomecases,the
starlight travels to an observer by multiple paths around the galaxy, producing a ring (Figure 11.26).
Basedoncurrentresearch,scientistknowonlythatdarkmatteriscold,slowmoving,andinteractsweaklywithordinary
matter. Dark matter candidates include neutralinos (partners of Z bosons, photons, and Higgs bosons in “supersymmetry
theory”) and particles that circulate in tiny rings set up by extra spatial dimensions.
Figure 11.25 Light from a distant star is bent around a galaxy.
Under the right conditions, two duplicate images of the same star can
be seen.
Figure 11.26 Light from a distant star is bent around a galaxy. Under the right conditions, we can see a ring of light instead of
a single star. (credit: modification of work by ESA/Hubble & NASA)
Increasingly precise astronomical measurements of the expanding universe also reveal the presence of a new form of
energycalleddarkenergy.Thisenergyisthoughttoexplainlarger-than-expectedvaluesfortheobservedgalacticredshifts
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 545
for distant galaxies. These redshifts suggest that the universe is not only expanding, but expanding at an increasing rate.
Virtuallynothingisknownaboutthenatureandpropertiesofdarkenergy.Together,darkenergyanddarkmatterrepresent
two of the most interesting and unsolved puzzles of modern physics. Scientists attribute 68.3% of the energy of the
universetodarkenergy, 26.8% todarkmatter,andjust 4.9% tothemass-energyofordinaryparticles(Figure 11.27).
Giventhecurrentgreatmysteryoverthenatureofdarkmatteranddarkenergy,IsaacNewton’shumblewordsareastrue
now as they were centuries ago:
“IdonotknowwhatImayappeartotheworld,buttomyselfIseemtohavebeenonlylikeaboyplayingonthesea-shore,
anddivertingmyselfinnowandthenfindingasmootherpebbleoraprettiershellthanordinary,whilstthegreatoceanof
truth lay all undiscovered before me.”
Figure 11.27 Estimated distribution of matter and energy in the universe.
(credit: NASA/WMAP Science Team)