# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 209-213
############################################################

5.1 • Forces 197
FIGURE 5.6 (a) The forces acting on the student are due to the chair, the table, the floor, and Earth’s gravitational attraction. (b) In solving a
problem involving the student, we may want to consider only the forces acting along the line running through his torso. A free-body diagram
for this situation is shown.
In most situations, forces are grouped into two categories: contact forces and field forces. As you might guess,
contact forces are due to direct physical contact between objects. For example, the student in Figure 5.6
experiences the contact forces , , and , which are exerted by the chair on his posterior, the floor on his feet, and
the table on his forearms, respectively. Field forces, however, act without the necessity of physical contact between
objects. They depend on the presence of a “field” in the region of space surrounding the body under consideration.
Since the student is in Earth’s gravitational field, he feels a gravitational force ; in other words, he has weight.
You can think of a field as a property of space that is detectable by the forces it exerts. Scientists think there are only
four fundamental force fields in nature. These are the gravitational, electromagnetic, strong nuclear, and weak fields
(we consider these four forces in nature later in this text). As noted for in Figure 5.6, the gravitational field is
responsible for the weight of a body. The forces of the electromagnetic field include those of static electricity and
magnetism; they are also responsible for the attraction among atoms in bulk matter. Both the strong nuclear and the
weak force fields are effective only over distances roughly equal to a length of scale no larger than an atomic
nucleus ( ). Their range is so small that neither field has influence in the macroscopic world of Newtonian
mechanics.
Contact forces are fundamentally electromagnetic. While the elbow of the student in Figure 5.6 is in contact with the
tabletop, the atomic charges in his skin interact electromagnetically with the charges in the surface of the table. The
net (total) result is the force . Similarly, when adhesive tape sticks to a piece of paper, the atoms of the tape are
intermingled with those of the paper to cause a net electromagnetic force between the two objects. However, in the
context of Newtonian mechanics, the electromagnetic origin of contact forces is not an important concern.
Vector Notation for Force
As previously discussed, force is a vector; it has both magnitude and direction. The SI unit of force is called the
newton (abbreviated N), and 1 N is the force needed to accelerate an object with a mass of 1 kg at a rate of :
An easy way to remember the size of a newton is to imagine holding a small apple; it has a
weight of about 1 N.
We can thus describe a two-dimensional force in the form (the unit vectors indicate the
direction of these forces along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively) and a three-dimensional force in the form
In Figure 5.3, let’s suppose that ice skater 1, on the left side of the figure, pushes

198 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
horizontally with a force of 30.0 N to the right; we represent this as Similarly, if ice skater 2 pushes
with a force of 40.0 N in the positive vertical direction shown, we would write The resultant of the
two forces causes a mass to accelerate—in this case, the third ice skater. This resultant is called the net external
force and is found by taking the vector sum of all external forces acting on an object or system (thus, we can
also represent net external force as ):
5.1
This equation can be extended to any number of forces.
In this example, we have . The hypotenuse of the triangle shown in
Figure 5.3 is the resultant force, or net force. It is a vector. To find its magnitude (the size of the vector, without
regard to direction), we use the rule given in Vectors, taking the square root of the sum of the squares of the
components:
The direction is given by
measured from the positive x-axis, as shown in the free-body diagram in Figure 5.3(b).
Let’s suppose the ice skaters now push the third ice skater with and . What
is the resultant of these two forces? We must recognize that force is a vector; therefore, we must add using the rules
for vector addition:
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.1
Find the magnitude and direction of the net force in the ice skater example just given.
INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation below to learn how to add vectors. Drag vectors onto a graph, change their length and
angle, and sum them together. The magnitude, angle, and components of each vector can be displayed in several
formats.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21addvectors)
5.2 Newton's First Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe Newton's first law of motion
• Recognize friction as an external force
• Define inertia
• Identify inertial reference frames
• Calculate equilibrium for a system
Experience suggests that an object at rest remains at rest if left alone and that an object in motion tends to slow
down and stop unless some effort is made to keep it moving. However, Newton’s first law gives a deeper
explanation of this observation.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.2 • Newton's First Law 199
NEWTON’S FIRST LAW OF MOTION
A body at rest remains at rest or, if in motion, remains in motion at constant velocity unless acted on by a net
external force.
Note the repeated use of the verb “remains.” We can think of this law as preserving the status quo of motion. Also
note the expression “constant velocity;” this means that the object maintains a path along a straight line, since
neither the magnitude nor the direction of the velocity vector changes. We can use Figure 5.7 to consider the two
parts of Newton’s first law.
FIGURE 5.7 (a) A hockey puck is shown at rest; it remains at rest until an outside force such as a hockey stick changes its state of rest; (b) a
hockey puck is shown in motion; it continues in motion in a straight line until an outside force causes it to change its state of motion.
Although it is slick, an ice surface provides some friction that slows the puck.
Rather than contradicting our experience, Newton’s first law says that there must be a cause for any change in
velocity (a change in either magnitude or direction) to occur. This cause is a net external force, which we defined
earlier in the chapter. An object sliding across a table or floor slows down due to the net force of friction acting on
the object. If friction disappears, will the object still slow down?
The idea of cause and effect is crucial in accurately describing what happens in various situations. For example,
consider what happens to an object sliding along a rough horizontal surface. The object quickly grinds to a halt. If we
spray the surface with talcum powder to make the surface smoother, the object slides farther. If we make the
surface even smoother by rubbing lubricating oil on it, the object slides farther yet. Extrapolating to a frictionless
surface and ignoring air resistance, we can imagine the object sliding in a straight line indefinitely. Friction is thus the
cause of slowing (consistent with Newton’s first law). The object would not slow down if friction were eliminated.
Consider an air hockey table (Figure 5.8). When the air is turned off, the puck slides only a short distance before
friction slows it to a stop. However, when the air is turned on, it creates a nearly frictionless surface, and the puck
glides long distances without slowing down. Additionally, if we know enough about the friction, we can accurately
predict how quickly the object slows down.
FIGURE 5.8 An air hockey table is useful in illustrating Newton’s laws. When the air is off, friction quickly slows the puck; but when the air is
on, it minimizes contact between the puck and the hockey table, and the puck glides far down the table.

200 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
Newton’s first law is general and can be applied to anything from an object sliding on a table to a satellite in orbit to
blood pumped from the heart. Experiments have verified that any change in velocity (speed or direction) must be
caused by an external force. The idea of generally applicable or universal laws is important—it is a basic feature of all
laws of physics. Identifying these laws is like recognizing patterns in nature from which further patterns can be
discovered. The genius of Galileo, who first developed the idea for the first law of motion, and Newton, who clarified
it, was to ask the fundamental question: “What is the cause?” Thinking in terms of cause and effect is fundamentally
different from the typical ancient Greek approach, when questions such as “Why does a tiger have stripes?” would
have been answered in Aristotelian fashion, such as “That is the nature of the beast.” The ability to think in terms of
cause and effect is the ability to make a connection between an observed behavior and the surrounding world.
Gravitation and Inertia
Regardless of the scale of an object, whether a molecule or a subatomic particle, two properties remain valid and
thus of interest to physics: gravitation and inertia. Both are connected to mass. Roughly speaking, mass is a
measure of the amount of matter in something. Gravitation is the attraction of one mass to another, such as the
attraction between yourself and Earth that holds your feet to the floor. The magnitude of this attraction is your
weight, and it is a force.
Mass is also related to inertia, the ability of an object to resist changes in its motion—in other words, to resist
acceleration. Newton’s first law is often called the law of inertia. As we know from experience, some objects have
more inertia than others. It is more difficult to change the motion of a large boulder than that of a basketball, for
example, because the boulder has more mass than the basketball. In other words, the inertia of an object is
measured by its mass. The relationship between mass and weight is explored later in this chapter.
Inertial Reference Frames
Earlier, we stated Newton’s first law as “A body at rest remains at rest or, if in motion, remains in motion at constant
velocity unless acted on by a net external force.” It can also be stated as “Every body remains in its state of uniform
motion in a straight line unless it is compelled to change that state by forces acting on it.” To Newton, “uniform
motion in a straight line” meant constant velocity, which includes the case of zero velocity, or rest. Therefore, the
first law says that the velocity of an object remains constant if the net force on it is zero.
Newton’s first law is usually considered to be a statement about reference frames. It provides a method for
identifying a special type of reference frame: the inertial reference frame. In principle, we can make the net force
on a body zero. If its velocity relative to a given frame is constant, then that frame is said to be inertial. So by
definition, an inertial reference frame is a reference frame in which Newton’s first law is valid. Newton’s first law
applies to objects with constant velocity. From this fact, we can infer the following statement.
INERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
A reference frame moving at constant velocity relative to an inertial frame is also inertial. A reference frame
accelerating relative to an inertial frame is not inertial.
Are inertial frames common in nature? It turns out that well within experimental error, a reference frame at rest
relative to the most distant, or “fixed,” stars is inertial. All frames moving uniformly with respect to this fixed-star
frame are also inertial. For example, a nonrotating reference frame attached to the Sun is, for all practical purposes,
inertial, because its velocity relative to the fixed stars does not vary by more than one part in Earth
accelerates relative to the fixed stars because it rotates on its axis and revolves around the Sun; hence, a reference
frame attached to its surface is not inertial. For most problems, however, such a frame serves as a sufficiently
accurate approximation to an inertial frame, because the acceleration of a point on Earth’s surface relative to the
fixed stars is rather small ( ). Thus, unless indicated otherwise, we consider reference frames
fixed on Earth to be inertial.
Finally, no particular inertial frame is more special than any other. As far as the laws of nature are concerned, all
inertial frames are equivalent. In analyzing a problem, we choose one inertial frame over another simply on the
basis of convenience.
Access for free at openstax.org