# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 516-521
############################################################

508 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
ideas that are conjectured but still unproven.
11.1 | Introduction to Particle Physics
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the four fundamental forces and what particles participate in them
• Identify and describe fermions and bosons
• Identify and describe the quark and lepton families
• Distinguish between particles and antiparticles, and describe their interactions
Elementary particle physics is the study of fundamental particles and their interactions in nature. Those who study
elementaryparticlephysics—theparticlephysicists—differfromotherphysicistsinthescaleofthesystemsthattheystudy.
Aparticlephysicistisnotcontenttostudythemicroscopicworldofcells,molecules,atoms,orevenatomicnuclei.They
areinterestedinphysicalprocessesthatoccuratscalesevensmallerthanatomicnuclei.Atthesametime,theyengagethe
mostprofoundmysteriesinnature:Howdidtheuniversebegin?Whatexplainsthepatternofmassesintheuniverse?Why
is there more matter than antimatter in the universe? Why are energy and momentum conserved? How will the universe
evolve?
Four Fundamental Forces
An important step to answering these questions is to understand particles and their interactions. Particle interactions are
expressedintermsoffourfundamentalforces.Inorderofdecreasingstrength,theseforcesarethestrongnuclearforce,
the electromagnetic force, theweak nuclear force, and the gravitational force.
1. Strong nuclear force. The strong nuclear force is a very strong attractive force that acts only over very short
distances (about 10 −15 m).The strongnuclear force isresponsible forbinding protonsandneutrons together in
atomicnuclei.Notallparticlesparticipateinthestrongnuclearforce;forinstance,electronsandneutrinosarenot
affected by it. As the name suggests, this force is much stronger than the other forces.
2. Electromagnetic force. The electromagnetic force can act over very large distances (it has an infinite range) but
is only 1/100 the strength of the strong nuclear force. Particles that interact through this force are said to have
“charge.”Intheclassicaltheoryofstaticelectricity(Coulomb’slaw),theelectricforcevariesastheproductofthe
chargesoftheinteractingparticles,andastheinversesquareofthedistancesbetweenthem.Incontrasttothestrong
force,theelectromagneticforcecanbeattractiveorrepulsive(oppositechargesattractandlikechargesrepel).The
magneticforcedependsinamorecomplicatedwayonthechargesandtheirmotions.Theunificationoftheelectric
andmagneticforceintoasingleelectromagneticforce(anachievementofJamesClerkMaxwell)standsasoneof
thegreatestintellectualachievementsofthenineteenthcentury.Thisforceiscentraltoscientificmodelsofatomic
structure and molecular bonding.
3. Weaknuclearforce.Theweaknuclearforceactsoververyshortdistances (10 −15 m ⎞ and,asitsnamesuggest,
⎠
isveryweak.Itisroughly 10 −6 thestrengthofthestrongnuclearforce.Thisforceismanifestedmostnotablyin
decaysofelementaryparticlesandneutrinointeractions.Forexample,theneutroncandecaytoaproton,electron,
and electron neutrino through the weak force. The weak force is vitally important because it is essential for
understanding stellar nucleosynthesis—the process that creates new atomic nuclei in the cores of stars.
4. Gravitationalforce.Liketheelectromagneticforce,thegravitationalforcecanactoverinfinitelylargedistances;
however,itisonly 10 −38 asstrongasthestrongnuclearforce.InNewton’sclassicaltheoryofgravity,theforce
ofgravityvariesastheproductofthemassesoftheinteractingparticlesandastheinversesquareofthedistance
between them. This force is an attractive force that acts between all particles with mass. In modern theories of
gravity, this force behavior is considered a special case for low-energy macroscopic interactions. Compared with
the other forces of nature, gravity is by far the weakest.
Thefundamentalforcesmaynotbetruly“fundamental”butmayactuallybedifferentaspectsofthesameforce.Justasthe
electricandmagneticforceswereunifiedintoanelectromagneticforce,physicistsinthe1970sunifiedtheelectromagnetic
forcewiththeweaknuclearforceintoanelectroweakforce.Anyscientifictheorythatattemptstounifytheelectroweak
force and strong nuclear force is called a grand unified theory, and any theory that attempts to unify all four forces is
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 509
called atheory of everything. We will return to the concept of unification later in this chapter.
Classifications of Elementary Particles
Alargenumberofsubatomicparticlesexistinnature.Theseparticlescanbeclassifiedintwoways:thepropertyofspinand
participationinthefourfundamentalforces.Recallthatthespinofaparticleisanalogoustotherotationofamacroscopic
object about its own axis. These types of classification are described separately below.
Classification by spin
Particlesofmattercanbedividedintofermionsandbosons.Fermionshavehalf-integralspin ⎛1ℏ, 3ℏ, … ⎞ andbosons
⎝2 2 ⎠
have integral spin (0ℏ, 1ℏ, 2ℏ, …). Familiar examples of fermions are electrons, protons, and neutrons. A familiar
exampleofabosonisaphoton.Fermionsandbosonsbehaveverydifferentlyingroups.Forexample,whenelectronsare
confinedtoasmallregionofspace,Pauli’sexclusionprinciplestatesthatnotwoelectronscanoccupythesamequantum-
mechanical state. However, when photons are confined to a small region of space, there is no such limitation.
Thebehavioroffermionsandbosonsingroupscanbeunderstoodintermsofthepropertyofindistinguishability.Particles
aresaidtobe“indistinguishable”iftheyareidenticaltooneanother.Forexample,electronsareindistinguishablebecause
everyelectronintheuniversehasexactlythesamemassandspinasallotherelectrons—“whenyou’veseenoneelectron,
you’ve seen them all.” If you switch two indistinguishable particles in the same small region of space, the square of the
wavefunctionthatdescribesthissystemandcanbemeasured ⎛ ⎝|ψ| 2⎞
⎠
isunchanged.Ifthiswerenotthecase,wecouldtell
whetherornottheparticleshadbeenswitchedandtheparticlewouldnotbetrulyindistinguishable.Fermionsandbosons
differ by whether the sign of the wave function (ψ)— not directly observable—flips:
ψ →−ψ(indistinguishable fermions),
ψ → +ψ(indistinguishable bosons).
Fermionsaresaidtobe“antisymmetriconexchange”andbosonsare“symmetriconexchange.”Pauli’sexclusionprinciple
is a consequence of exchange symmetry of fermions—a connection developed in a more advanced course in modern
physics.TheelectronicstructureofatomsispredicatedonPauli’sexclusionprincipleandisthereforedirectlyrelatedtothe
indistinguishability of electrons.
Classification by force interactions
Fermionscanbefurtherdividedintoquarksandleptons.Theprimarydifferencebetweenthesetwotypesofparticlesis
thatquarksinteractviathestrongforceandleptonsdonot.Quarksandleptons(aswellasbosonstobediscussedlater)are
organizedinFigure11.2.Theuppertworows(firstthreecolumnsinpurple)containsixquarks.Thesequarksarearranged
intotwoparticlefamilies:up,charm,andtop(u,c,t),anddown,strange,andbottom(d,s,b).Membersofthesameparticle
familysharethesamepropertiesbutdifferinmass(givenin MeV/c2).Forexample,themassofthetopquarkismuch
greaterthanthecharmquark,andthemassofthecharmquarkismuchgreaterthantheupquark.Allquarksinteractwith
one another through the strong nuclear force.

510 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Figure 11.2 The families of subatomic particles, categorized by the types of forces with
which they interact. (credit: modification of work by “MissMJ”/Wikimedia Commons)
Ordinary matter consists of two types of quarks: the up quark (elementary charge, q= +2/3) and the down quark
(q=−1/3). Heavier quarks are unstable and quickly decay to lighter ones via the weak force. Quarks bind together in
groupsoftwosandthreescalledhadronsviathestrongforce.Hadronsthatconsistoftwoquarksarecalledmesons,and
those that consist of three quarks are called baryons. Examples of mesons include the pion and kaon, and examples of
baryonsincludethefamiliarprotonandneutron.Aprotonistwoupquarksandadownquark (p=uud, q=+1) anda
neutronisoneupquarkandtwodownquarks(n=udd, q=0).Propertiesofsamplemesonsandbaryonsaregivenin
Table 11.1. Quarks participate in all four fundamental forces: strong, weak, electromagnetic, and gravitational.
Thelowertworowsinthefigure(ingreen)containsixleptonsarrangedintotwoparticlefamilies:electron,muon,andtau
(e, µ, τ),andelectronneutrino,muonneutrino,andtauneutrino(υ e, υ µ, υ τ ).Themuonisover200timesheavierthan
anelectron,butisotherwisesimilartotheelectron.Thetauisabout3500timesheavierthantheelectron,butisotherwise
similar to the muon and electron. Once created, the muon and tau quickly decay to lighter particles via the weak force.
Leptonsdonotparticipateinthestrongforce.Quarksandleptonswillbediscussedlaterinthischapter.Leptonsparticipate
in the weak, electromagnetic, and gravitational forces, but do not participate in the strong force.
Bosons (shown in red) are the force carriers of the fermions. In this model, leptons and quarks interact with each other
bysendingandreceivingbosons.Forexample,Coulombicinteractionoccurswhentwopositivelychargedparticlessend
andreceive(exchange)photons.Thephotonsaresaidto“carry”theforcebetweenchargedparticles.Likewise,attraction
betweentwoquarksinanatomicnucleusoccurswhentwoquarkssendandreceivegluons.Additionalexamplesinclude
WandZbosons(whichcarryweaknuclearforce)andgravitons(whichcarrygravitationalforce).TheHiggsbosonisa
special particle: When it interacts with other particles, it endows them not with force but with mass. In other words, the
Higgsbosonhelpstoexplainswhyparticleshavemass.Theseassertionsarepartofatentativebutveryproductivescientific
model (the Standard Model) discussed later.
Particles and Antiparticles
Inthelate1920s,thespecialtheoryofrelativityandquantummechanicswerecombinedintoarelativisticquantumtheory
oftheelectron.Asurprisingresultofthistheorywasthepredictionoftwoenergystatesforeachelectron:Oneisassociated
withtheelectron,andtheotherisassociatedwithanotherparticlewiththesamemassofanelectronbutwithachargeof
e + . This particle is called the antielectron orpositron. The positron was discovered experimentally in the 1930s.
Soonitwasdiscoveredthatforeveryparticleinnature,thereisacorrespondingantiparticle.Anantiparticlehasthesame
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology 511
massandlifetimeasitsassociatedparticle,andtheoppositesignofelectriccharge.Theseparticlesareproducedinhigh-
energyreactions.Examplesofhigh-energyparticlesincludetheantimuon(µ+ ),anti-upquark(−u),andanti-downquark
−
(d). (Notethatantiparticlesforquarksaredesignatedwithanover-bar.)Manymesonsandbaryonscontainantiparticles.
For example, the antiproton (− p) is −u−u − d and the positively charged pion (π+ ) is u − d. Some neutral particles, such as
thephotonandthe π0 meson,aretheirownantiparticles.Sampleparticles,antiparticles,andtheirpropertiesarelistedin
Table 11.1.
Particle name Symbol Antiparticle Mass Average lifetime
(MeV/c2
)
(s)
Leptons
Electron e−
e
+ 0.511 Stable
Electron υ e υ— e ≈0 Stable
neutrino
Muon µ− µ+ 105.7
2.20×10
−6
Muon neutrino υ µ υ— µ ≈0 Stable
Tau τ− τ+ 1784
<4×10
−13
Tau neutrino υ τ υ— τ ≈0 Stable
Hadrons
Baryons Proton p − p 938.3 Stable
Neutron n − n 939.6 920
Lambda Λ 0 Λ — 0 1115.6 2.6×10 −10
Sigma Σ + Σ− 1189.4 0.80×10 −10
Xi Ξ + Ξ− 1315 2.9×10 −10
Omega Ω + Ω− 1672 0.82×10 −10
Mesons Pion π+ π− 139.6
2.60×10
−8
π-Zero π0 π0 135.0
0.83×10
−16
Kaon K + K− 493.7 1.24×10 −8
k-Short K S 0 K — S 0 497.7 0.89×10 −10
k-Long K 0 L K — 0 L 497.0 5.2×10 −8
J/ψ J/ψ J/ψ 3100 7.1×10−21
Upsilon Υ Υ 9460 1.2×10 −20
Table 11.1Particles and their Properties
Thesameforcesthatholdordinarymattertogetheralsoholdantimattertogether.Undertherightconditions,itispossible
tocreateantiatomssuchasantihydrogen,antioxygen,andevenantiwater.Inantiatoms,positronsorbitanegativelycharged
nucleus of antiprotons and antineutrons.Figure 11.3compares atoms and antiatoms.

512 Chapter 11 | Particle Physics and Cosmology
Figure 11.3 A comparison of the simplest atoms of matter and
antimatter. (a) In the Bohr model, an antihydrogen atom consists
of a positron that orbits an antiproton. (b) An antihelium atom
consists of two positrons that orbit a nucleus of two antiprotons
and two antineutrons.
Antimattercannotexistforlonginnaturebecauseparticlesandantiparticlesannihilateeachothertoproducehigh-energy
radiation. A common example is electron-positron annihilation. This process proceeds by the reaction
e−+e + →2γ.
Theelectronandpositronvanishcompletelyandtwophotonsareproducedintheirplace.(Itturnsoutthattheproduction
of a single photon would violate conservation of energy and momentum.) This reaction can also proceed in the reverse
direction:Twophotonscanannihilateeachothertoproduceanelectronandpositronpair.Or,asinglephotoncanproduce
an electron-positron pair in the field of a nucleus, a process called pair production. Reactions of this kind are measured
routinely in modern particle detectors. The existence of antiparticles in nature is not science fiction.
Watch this video (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21matter) to learn more about matter and antimatter
particles.
11.2 | Particle Conservation Laws
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish three conservation laws: baryon number, lepton number, and strangeness
• Use rules to determine the total baryon number, lepton number, and strangeness of particles
before and after a reaction
• Use baryon number, lepton number, and strangeness conservation to determine if particle
reactions or decays occur
Conservation laws are critical to an understanding of particle physics. Strong evidence exists that energy, momentum,
and angular momentum are all conserved in all particle interactions. The annihilation of an electron and positron at rest,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9