# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 361-367
############################################################

8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 349
The kinetic energy at point B therefore is 0.12 J because the total energy is zero. Therefore, the speed of the
block at point B is equal to
Significance
Even though the potential energy due to gravity is relative to a chosen zero location, the solutions to this problem
would be the same if the zero energy points were chosen at different locations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.4
Suppose the mass in Equation 8.6 is doubled while keeping the all other conditions the same. Would the maximum
expansion of the spring increase, decrease, or remain the same? Would the speed at point B be larger, smaller, or
the same compared to the original mass?
INTERACTIVE
Engage the simulation below to learn about conservation of energy with a skater! Build tracks, ramps and jumps for
the skater and view the kinetic energy, potential energy and friction as he moves. You can also take the skater to
different planets or even space!
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21conenerskat)
A sample chart of a variety of energies is shown in Table 8.1 to give you an idea about typical energy values
associated with certain events. Some of these are calculated using kinetic energy, whereas others are calculated by
using quantities found in a form of potential energy that may not have been discussed at this point.
Object/phenomenon Energy in joules
Big Bang
Annual world energy use
Large fusion bomb (9 megaton)
Hiroshima-size fission bomb (10 kiloton)
1 barrel crude oil
1 metric ton TNT
1 gallon of gasoline
Daily adult food intake (recommended)
1000-kg car at 90 km/h
TABLE 8.1 Energy of Various Objects and Phenomena

350 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Object/phenomenon Energy in joules
Tennis ball at 100 km/h
Mosquito
Single electron in a TV tube beam
Energy to break one DNA strand
1 kg hydrogen (fusion to helium)
1 kg uranium (nuclear fission)
TABLE 8.1 Energy of Various Objects and Phenomena
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Characterize a conservative force in several different ways
• Specify mathematical conditions that must be satisfied by a conservative force and its components
• Relate the conservative force between particles of a system to the potential energy of the system
• Calculate the components of a conservative force in various cases
In the interactions we considered in Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy, any transition between kinetic
and potential energy did not change the total energy of the system. This was path independent, meaning that we
can start and stop at any two points in the problem, and the total energy of the system—kinetic plus potential—at
these points are equal to each other. This is characteristic of a conservative force. We dealt with conservative
forces in the preceding section, such as the gravitational force and spring force. When comparing the motion of the
football in Figure 8.2, the total energy of the system never changes, even though the gravitational potential energy of
the football increases, as the ball rises relative to ground and falls back to the initial gravitational potential energy
when the football player catches the ball. Non-conservative forces and the work that they do are path dependent.
Dissipative forces such as friction or air resistance, for example, are non-conservative. These forces take energy
away from the system as the system progresses; energy that you can’t get back. Push-pull forces are also generally
non-conservative. Imagine pushing a merry-go-round. The total work done in returning to the starting point depends
on how many revolutions are completed, and therefore the total energy at that location is not constant.
CONSERVATIVE FORCE
The work done by a conservative force is independent of the path; in other words, the work done by a
conservative force is the same for any path connecting two points:
8.8
The work done by a non-conservative force depends on the path taken.
Equivalently, a force is conservative if the work it does around any closed path is zero:
8.9
[In Equation 8.9, we use the notation of a circle in the middle of the integral sign for a line integral over a closed
path, a notation found in most physics and engineering texts.] Equation 8.8 and Equation 8.9 are equivalent because
Access for free at openstax.org

8.2 • Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces 351
any closed path is the sum of two paths: the first going from A to B, and the second going from B to A. The work
done going along a path from B to A is the negative of the work done going along the same path from A to B, where A
and B are any two points on the closed path:
You might ask how we go about proving whether or not a force is conservative, since the definitions involve any and
all paths from A to B, or any and all closed paths, but to do the integral for the work, you have to choose a particular
path. One answer is that the work done is independent of path if the infinitesimal work is an exact
differential, the way the infinitesimal net work was equal to the exact differential of the kinetic energy,
when we derived the work-energy theorem in Work-Energy Theorem. There are mathematical conditions that you
can use to test whether the infinitesimal work done by a force is an exact differential, and the force is conservative.
These conditions only involve differentiation and are thus relatively easy to apply. In two dimensions, the condition
for to be an exact differential is
8.10
You may recall that the work done by the force in Example 7.4 depended on the path. For that force,
Therefore,
which indicates it is a non-conservative force. Can you see what you could change to make it a conservative force?
FIGURE 8.6 A grinding wheel applies a non-conservative force, because the work done depends on how many rotations the wheel makes,
so it is path-dependent. (credit: modification of work by Grantez Stephens, U.S. Navy)
EXAMPLE 8.5
Conservative or Not?
Which of the following two-dimensional forces are conservative and which are not? Assume a and b are constants
with appropriate units:

352 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
(a) (b) (c)
Strategy
Apply the condition stated in Equation 8.10, namely, using the derivatives of the components of each force
indicated. If the derivative of the y-component of the force with respect to x is equal to the derivative of the
x-component of the force with respect to y, the force is a conservative force, which means the path taken for
potential energy or work calculations always yields the same results.
Solution
a. and , so this force is non-conservative.
b. and so this force is conservative.
c. again conservative.
Significance
The conditions in Equation 8.10 are derivatives as functions of a single variable; in three dimensions, similar
conditions exist that involve more derivatives.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.5
A two-dimensional, conservative force is zero on the x- and y-axes, and satisfies the condition
. What is the magnitude of the force at the point
Before leaving this section, we note that non-conservative forces do not have potential energy associated with
them. There is always a conservative force associated with every potential energy. We have seen that potential
energy is defined in relation to the work done by conservative forces. This relation, Equation 8.1, involved an integral
for the work; starting with the force and displacement, you integrated to get the work and the change in potential
energy. However, integration is the inverse operation of differentiation; you could equally well have started with the
potential energy and taken its derivative, with respect to displacement, to get the force. The infinitesimal increment
of potential energy is the dot product of the force and the infinitesimal displacement,
Here, we chose to represent the displacement in an arbitrary direction by so as not to be restricted to any
particular coordinate direction. We also expressed the dot product in terms of the magnitude of the infinitesimal
displacement and the component of the force in its direction. Both these quantities are scalars, so you can divide by
dl to get
8.11
This equation gives the relation between force and the potential energy associated with it. In words, the component
of a conservative force, in a particular direction, equals the negative of the derivative of the corresponding potential
energy, with respect to a displacement in that direction. For one-dimensional motion, say along the x-axis, Equation
8.11 give the entire vector force,
In two dimensions,
Access for free at openstax.org

8.3 • Conservation of Energy 353
From this equation, you can see why Equation 8.11 is the condition for the work to be an exact differential, in terms
of the derivatives of the components of the force. In general, a partial derivative notation is used. If a function has
many variables in it, the derivative is taken only of the variable the partial derivative specifies. The other variables
are held constant. In three dimensions, you add another term for the z-component, and the result is that the force is
the negative of the gradient of the potential energy. However, we won’t be looking at three-dimensional examples
just yet.
EXAMPLE 8.6
Force due to a Quartic Potential Energy
The potential energy for a particle undergoing one-dimensional motion along the x-axis is
where Its total energy at and it is not subject to any non-conservative forces. Find (a) the
positions where its kinetic energy is zero and (b) the forces at those positions.
Strategy
(a) We can find the positions where so the potential energy equals the total energy of the given system. (b)
Using Equation 8.11, we can find the force evaluated at the positions found from the previous part, since the
mechanical energy is conserved.
Solution
a. The total energy of the system of 2 J equals the quartic elastic energy as given in the problem,
Solving for results in
b. From Equation 8.11,
Thus, evaluating the force at , we get
At both positions, the magnitude of the forces is 8 N and the directions are toward the origin, since this is the
potential energy for a restoring force.
Significance
Finding the force from the potential energy is mathematically easier than finding the potential energy from the force,
because differentiating a function is generally easier than integrating one.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.6
Find the forces on the particle in Example 8.6 when its kinetic energy is 1.0 J at
8.3 Conservation of Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Formulate the principle of conservation of mechanical energy, with or without the presence of non-
conservative forces
• Use the conservation of mechanical energy to calculate various properties of simple systems
In this section, we elaborate and extend the result we derived in Potential Energy of a System, where we re-wrote
the work-energy theorem in terms of the change in the kinetic and potential energies of a particle. This will lead us

354 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
to a discussion of the important principle of the conservation of mechanical energy. As you continue to examine
other topics in physics, in later chapters of this book, you will see how this conservation law is generalized to
encompass other types of energy and energy transfers. The last section of this chapter provides a preview.
The terms ‘conserved quantity’ and ‘conservation law’ have specific, scientific meanings in physics, which are
different from the everyday meanings associated with the use of these words. (The same comment is also true
about the scientific and everyday uses of the word ‘work.’) In everyday usage, you could conserve water by not using
it, or by using less of it, or by re-using it. Water is composed of molecules consisting of two atoms of hydrogen and
one of oxygen. Bring these atoms together to form a molecule and you create water; dissociate the atoms in such a
molecule and you destroy water. However, in scientific usage, a conserved quantity for a system stays constant,
changes by a definite amount that is transferred to other systems, and/or is converted into other forms of that
quantity. A conserved quantity, in the scientific sense, can be transformed, but not strictly created or destroyed.
Thus, there is no physical law of conservation of water.
Systems with a Single Particle or Object
We first consider a system with a single particle or object. Returning to our development of Equation 8.2, recall that
we first separated all the forces acting on a particle into conservative and non-conservative types, and wrote the
work done by each type of force as a separate term in the work-energy theorem. We then replaced the work done by
the conservative forces by the change in the potential energy of the particle, combining it with the change in the
particle’s kinetic energy to get Equation 8.2. Now, we write this equation without the middle step and define the sum
of the kinetic and potential energies, to be the mechanical energy of the particle.
CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
The mechanical energy E of a particle stays constant unless forces outside the system or non-conservative
forces do work on it, in which case, the change in the mechanical energy is equal to the work done by the non-
conservative forces:
8.12
This statement expresses the concept of energy conservation for a classical particle as long as there is no non-
conservative work. Recall that a classical particle is just a point mass, is nonrelativistic, and obeys Newton’s laws of
motion. In Relativity (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction), we will see
that conservation of energy still applies to a non-classical particle, but for that to happen, we have to make a slight
adjustment to the definition of energy.
It is sometimes convenient to separate the case where the work done by non-conservative forces is zero, either
because no such forces are assumed present, or, like the normal force, they do zero work when the motion is
parallel to the surface. Then
8.13
In this case, the conservation of mechanical energy can be expressed as follows: The mechanical energy of a
particle does not change if all the non-conservative forces that may act on it do no work. Understanding the concept
of energy conservation is the important thing, not the particular equation you use to express it.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Conservation of Energy
1. Identify the body or bodies to be studied (the system). Often, in applications of the principle of mechanical
energy conservation, we study more than one body at the same time.
2. Identify all forces acting on the body or bodies.
3. Determine whether each force that does work is conservative. If a non-conservative force (e.g., friction) is
Access for free at openstax.org