# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 261-267
############################################################

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 253
However,asshowninFigure6.6,theRayleigh–Jeanslawfailstocorrectlyreproduceexperimentalresults.Inthelimitof
shortwavelengths,theRayleigh–Jeanslawpredictsinfiniteradiationintensity,whichisinconsistentwiththeexperimental
resultsinwhichradiationintensityhasfinitevaluesintheultravioletregionofthespectrum.Thisdivergencebetweenthe
resultsofclassicaltheoryandexperiments,whichcametobecalledtheultravioletcatastrophe,showshowclassicalphysics
fails to explain the mechanism of blackbody radiation.
Figure 6.6 The ultraviolet catastrophe: The Rayleigh–Jeans
law does not explain the observed blackbody emission spectrum.
The blackbody radiation problem was solved in 1900 by Max Planck. Planck used the same idea as the Rayleigh–Jeans
modelinthesensethathetreatedtheelectromagneticwavesbetweenthewallsinsidethecavityclassically,andassumed
that the radiation is in equilibrium with the cavity walls. The innovative idea that Planck introduced in his model is the
assumptionthatthecavityradiationoriginatesfromatomicoscillationsinsidethecavitywalls,andthattheseoscillations
canhaveonlydiscretevaluesofenergy.Therefore,theradiationtrappedinsidethecavitywallscanexchangeenergywith
the walls only in discrete amounts. Planck’s hypothesis of discrete energy values, which he called quanta, assumes that
theoscillatorsinsidethecavitywallshavequantizedenergies.Thiswasabrandnewideathatwentbeyondtheclassical
physics of the nineteenth century because, as you learned in a previous chapter, in the classical picture, the energy of an
oscillatorcantakeonanycontinuousvalue.Planckassumedthattheenergyofanoscillator(E )canhaveonlydiscrete,
n
or quantized, values:
E n=nhf, wheren=1, 2, 3, ... (6.9)
InEquation6.9,fisthefrequencyofPlanck’soscillator.Thenaturalnumbernthatenumeratesthesediscreteenergiesis
called aquantum number. The physical constanthis calledPlanck’s constant:
h=6.626×10 −34 J·s= 4.136×10 −15 eV·s (6.10)
Each discrete energy value corresponds to a quantum state of a Planck oscillator. Quantum states are enumerated by
quantumnumbers.Forexample,whenPlanck’soscillatorisinitsfirst n=1 quantumstate,itsenergyis E =hf; when
1
it is in the n=2 quantum state, its energy is E =2hf; when it is in the n=3 quantum state, E =3hf; and so on.
2 3
NotethatEquation6.9showsthatthereareinfinitelymanyquantumstates,whichcanberepresentedasasequence{hf,
2hf,3hf,…,(n–1)hf,nhf,(n+1)hf,…}.Eachtwoconsecutivequantumstatesinthissequenceareseparatedbyanenergy
jump, ΔE=hf. Anoscillatorinthewallcanreceiveenergyfromtheradiationinthecavity(absorption),oritcangive
awayenergytotheradiationinthecavity(emission).Theabsorptionprocesssendstheoscillatortoahigherquantumstate,
andtheemissionprocesssendstheoscillatortoalowerquantumstate.Whicheverwaythisexchangeofenergygoes,the
smallestamountofenergythatcanbeexchangedishf.Thereisnoupperlimittohowmuchenergycanbeexchanged,but
whateverisexchangedmustbeanintegermultipleofhf.Iftheenergypacketdoesnothavethisexactamount,itisneither

254 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
absorbed nor emitted at the wall of the blackbody.
Planck’s Quantum Hypothesis
Planck’s hypothesis of energy quanta states that the amount of energy emitted by the oscillator is carried by the
quantum of radiation, ΔE:
ΔE=hf
Recall that the frequency of electromagnetic radiation is related to its wavelength and to the speed of light by the
fundamental relation fλ=c. This means that we can express Equation 6.10 equivalently in terms of wavelength λ.
Whenincludedinthecomputationoftheenergydensityofablackbody,Planck’shypothesisgivesthefollowingtheoretical
expression for the power intensity of emitted radiation per unit wavelength:
I(λ, T)=
2πhc2
1
(6.11)
λ5 e hc/λk B T −1
wherecisthespeedoflightinvacuumand k isBoltzmann’sconstant, k =1.380×10 −23 J/K. Thetheoreticalformula
B B
expressedinEquation 6.11iscalledPlanck’sblackbodyradiationlaw.Thislawisinagreement withtheexperimental
blackbody radiation curve (see Figure 6.7). In addition, Wien’s displacement law and Stefan’s law can both be derived
fromEquation6.11.ToderiveWien’sdisplacementlaw,weusedifferentialcalculustofindthemaximumoftheradiation
intensity curve I(λ, T). To derive Stefan’s law and find the value of the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, we use integral
calculusandintegrate I(λ, T) tofindthetotalpowerradiatedbyablackbodyatonetemperatureintheentirespectrumof
wavelengths from λ=0 to λ=∞. This derivation is left as an exercise later in this chapter.
Figure 6.7 Planck’s theoretical result (continuous curve) and
the experimental blackbody radiation curve (dots).
Example 6.3
Planck’s Quantum Oscillator
AquantumoscillatorinthecavitywallinFigure 6.2isvibratingatafrequencyof 5.0×1014Hz. Calculate
the spacing between its energy levels.
Strategy
EnergystatesofaquantumoscillatoraregivenbyEquation6.9.Theenergyspacing ΔE isobtainedbyfinding
the energy difference between two adjacent quantum states for quantum numbersn+ 1 andn.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 255
Solution
We can substitute the given frequency and Planck’s constant directly into the equation:
ΔE=E n+1 −E n=(n+1)hf −nhf =hf =(6.626×10 −34 J·s)(5.0×1014Hz)=3.3×10 −19 J
Significance
Notethatwedonotspecifywhatkindofmaterial wasusedtobuildthecavity.Here,aquantumoscillator isa
theoretical model of an atom or molecule of material in the wall.
6.4 Check Your Understanding A molecule is vibrating at a frequency of 5.0×1014Hz. What is the
smallest spacing between its vibrational energy levels?
Example 6.4
Quantum Theory Applied to a Classical Oscillator
A 1.0-kg mass oscillates at the end of a spring with a spring constant of 1000 N/m. The amplitude of these
oscillationsis0.10m.Usetheconceptofquantizationtofindtheenergyspacingforthisclassicaloscillator.Is
the energy quantization significant for macroscopic systems, such as this oscillator?
Strategy
We use Equation 6.10 as though the system were a quantum oscillator, but with the frequency f of the mass
vibratingonaspring.Toevaluatewhetherornotquantizationhasasignificanteffect,wecomparethequantum
energy spacing with the macroscopic total energy of this classical oscillator.
Solution
For the spring constant, k=1.0×10 3 N/m, the frequencyfof the mass, m=1.0kg, is
f = 2 1 π m k = 2 1 π 1.0× 1. 1 0 0 k 3 g N/m ≃5.0Hz
The energy quantum that corresponds to this frequency is
ΔE=hf =(6.626×10 −34 J·s)(5.0Hz)=3.3×10 −33 J
When vibrations have amplitude A=0.10m, the energy of oscillations is
E= 1kA2= 1 (1000N/m)(0.1m)2=5.0J
2 2
Significance
Thus, for a classical oscillator, we have ΔE/E≈10 −34 . We see that the separation of the energy levels is
immeasurablysmall.Therefore,forallpracticalpurposes,theenergyofaclassicaloscillatortakesoncontinuous
values. This is why classical principles may be applied to macroscopic systems encountered in everyday life
without loss of accuracy.
6.5 CheckYourUnderstandingWouldtheresultinExample6.4bedifferentifthemasswerenot1.0kg
but a tiny mass of 1.0µg, and the amplitude of vibrations were 0.10µm?
WhenPlanckfirstpublishedhisresult,thehypothesisofenergyquantawasnottakenseriouslybythephysicscommunity
because it did not follow from any established physics theory at that time. It was perceived, even by Planck himself, as
ausefulmathematical trickthatledtoagoodtheoretical“fit”totheexperimentalcurve.Thisperceptionwaschangedin
1905whenEinsteinpublishedhisexplanationofthephotoelectriceffect,inwhichhegavePlanck’senergyquantumanew
meaning: that of a particle of light.

256 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
6.2 | Photoelectric Effect
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section you will be able to:
• Describe physical characteristics of the photoelectric effect
• Explain why the photoelectric effect cannot be explained by classical physics
• Describe how Einstein’s idea of a particle of radiation explains the photoelectric effect
When a metal surface is exposed to a monochromatic electromagnetic wave of sufficiently short wavelength (or
equivalently,aboveathresholdfrequency),theincidentradiationisabsorbedandtheexposedsurfaceemitselectrons.This
phenomenon is known as thephotoelectric effect. Electrons that are emitted in this process are calledphotoelectrons.
TheexperimentalsetuptostudythephotoelectriceffectisshownschematicallyinFigure 6.8.Thetargetmaterialserves
astheanode,whichbecomestheemitterofphotoelectronswhenitisilluminatedbymonochromaticradiation.Wecallthis
electrode the photoelectrode.Photoelectrons are collected at the cathode, which is kept at a lower potential with respect
totheanode.Thepotentialdifferencebetweentheelectrodescanbeincreasedordecreased,oritspolaritycanbereversed.
Theelectrodesareenclosedinanevacuatedglasstubesothatphotoelectronsdonotlosetheirkineticenergyoncollisions
with air molecules in the space between electrodes.
When the target material is not exposed to radiation, no current is registered in this circuit because the circuit is broken
(note,thereisagapbetweentheelectrodes).Butwhenthetargetmaterialisconnectedtothenegativeterminalofabattery
andexposedtoradiation,acurrentisregisteredinthiscircuit;thiscurrentiscalledthephotocurrent.Supposethatwenow
reversethepotentialdifferencebetweentheelectrodessothatthetargetmaterialnowconnectswiththepositiveterminal
of a battery, and then we slowly increase the voltage. The photocurrent gradually dies out and eventually stops flowing
completelyatsomevalueofthisreversedvoltage.Thepotentialdifferenceatwhichthephotocurrentstopsflowingiscalled
thestopping potential.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 257
Figure 6.8 An experimental setup to study the photoelectric effect. The
anode and cathode are enclosed in an evacuated glass tube. The voltmeter
measures the electric potential difference between the electrodes, and the
ammeter measures the photocurrent. The incident radiation is
monochromatic.
Characteristics of the Photoelectric Effect
Thephotoelectriceffecthasthreeimportantcharacteristicsthatcannotbeexplainedbyclassicalphysics:(1)theabsenceof
alagtime,(2)theindependenceofthekineticenergyofphotoelectronsontheintensityofincidentradiation,and(3)the
presence of a cut-off frequency. Let’s examine each of these characteristics.
The absence of lag time
Whenradiationstrikesthetargetmaterialintheelectrode,electronsareemittedalmostinstantaneously,evenatverylow
intensitiesofincidentradiation.Thisabsenceoflagtimecontradictsourunderstandingbasedonclassicalphysics.Classical
physicspredictsthatforlow-energyradiation,itwouldtakesignificanttimebeforeirradiatedelectronscouldgainsufficient
energy to leave the electrode surface; however, such an energy buildup is not observed.
The intensity of incident radiation and the kinetic energy of photoelectrons
Typical experimental curves are shown in Figure 6.9, in which the photocurrent is plotted versus the applied potential
differencebetweentheelectrodes.Forthepositivepotentialdifference,thecurrentsteadilygrowsuntilitreachesaplateau.
Furtheringthepotentialincreasebeyondthispointdoesnotincreasethephotocurrentatall.Ahigherintensityofradiation
produces a higher value of photocurrent. For the negative potential difference, as the absolute value of the potential
differenceincreases,thevalueofthephotocurrentdecreasesandbecomeszeroatthestoppingpotential.Foranyintensity
of incident radiation, whether the intensity is high or low, the value of the stopping potential always stays at one value.
To understand why this result is unusual from the point of view of classical physics, we first have to analyze the
energy of photoelectrons. A photoelectron that leaves the surface has kinetic energy K. It gained this energy from the
incident electromagnetic wave. In the space between the electrodes, a photoelectron moves in the electric potential and
its energy changes by the amount qΔV, where ΔV is the potential difference and q=−e. Because no forces are
present but electric force, by applying the work-energy theorem, we obtain the energy balance ΔK−eΔV =0 for
the photoelectron, where ΔK is the change in the photoelectron’s kinetic energy. When the stopping potential −ΔV
s
is applied, the photoelectron loses its initial kinetic energy K and comes to rest. Thus, its energy balance becomes
i

258 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
(0−K i)−e(−ΔV s)=0, sothat K i=eΔV s. Inthepresenceofthestoppingpotential,thelargestkineticenergy K max
thataphotoelectroncanhaveisitsinitialkineticenergy,whichithasatthesurfaceofthephotoelectrode.Therefore,the
largest kinetic energy of photoelectrons can be directly measured by measuring the stopping potential:
K max=eΔV s. (6.12)
At this point we can see where the classical theory is at odds with the experimental results. In classical theory, the
photoelectronabsorbselectromagneticenergyinacontinuousway;thismeansthatwhentheincidentradiationhasahigh
intensity, the kinetic energy in Equation 6.12 is expected to be high. Similarly, when the radiation has a low intensity,
thekineticenergyisexpectedtobelow.Buttheexperimentshowsthatthemaximumkineticenergyofphotoelectronsis
independent of the light intensity.
Figure 6.9 The detected photocurrent plotted versus the
applied potential difference shows that for any intensity of
incident radiation, whether the intensity is high (upper curve) or
low (lower curve), the value of the stopping potential is always
the same.
The presence of a cut-off frequency
Foranymetalsurface,thereisaminimumfrequencyofincidentradiationbelowwhichphotocurrentdoesnotoccur.The
value of this cut-off frequency for the photoelectric effect is a physical property of the metal: Different materials have
differentvaluesofcut-offfrequency.Experimentaldatashowatypicallineartrend(seeFigure6.10).Thekineticenergyof
photoelectronsatthesurfacegrowslinearlywiththeincreasingfrequencyofincidentradiation.Measurementsforallmetal
surfacesgivelinearplotswithoneslope.Noneoftheseobservedphenomenaisinaccordwiththeclassicalunderstanding
ofnature.Accordingtotheclassicaldescription,thekineticenergyofphotoelectronsshouldnotdependonthefrequency
of incident radiation at all, and there should be no cut-off frequency. Instead, in the classical picture, electrons receive
energyfromtheincidentelectromagneticwaveinacontinuousway,andtheamountofenergytheyreceivedependsonly
ontheintensityoftheincidentlightandnothingelse.Sointheclassicalunderstanding,aslongasthelightisshining,the
photoelectric effect is expected to continue.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9