# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 386-394
############################################################

374 8 • Chapter Review
restoring force on the child with a constant of
5000 N/m. At the highest point of the bounce,
the child is 1.0 m above the level surface of the
trampoline. What is the compression distance of
the trampoline? Neglect the bending of the legs
or any transfer of energy of the child into the
trampoline while jumping.
68 . Shown below is a box of mass that sits on a
65 . A block of mass 200 g is attached at the end of a frictionless incline at an angle above the
massless spring at equilibrium length of spring horizontal . This box is connected by a
constant 50 N/m. The other end of the spring is relatively massless string, over a frictionless
attached to the ceiling and the mass is released pulley, and finally connected to a box at rest over
at a height considered to be where the the ledge, labeled . If and are a height
gravitational potential energy is zero. (a) What is h above the ground and : (a) What is
the net potential energy of the block at the the initial gravitational potential energy of the
instant the block is at the lowest point? (b) What system? (b) What is the final kinetic energy of
is the net potential energy of the block at the the system when hits the ground?
midpoint of its descent? (c) What is the speed of
the block at the midpoint of its descent?
66 . A T-shirt cannon launches a shirt at 5.00 m/s
from a platform height of 3.00 m from ground
level. How fast will the shirt be traveling if it is
caught by someone whose hands are (a) 1.00 m
from ground level? (b) 4.00 m from ground level?
Neglect air drag.
67 . A child (32 kg) jumps up and down on a
trampoline. The trampoline exerts a spring
Additional Problems
69 . A massless spring with force constant
hangs from the ceiling. A 2.0-kg
block is attached to the free end of the spring
and released. If the block falls 17 cm before
starting back upwards, how much work is done
by friction during its descent?
70 . A particle of mass 2.0 kg moves under the
influence of the force
Suppose a frictional force also acts on the
particle. If the particle’s speed when it starts at 72 . A body of mass m and negligible size starts from
is 0.0 m/s and when it arrives at rest and slides down the surface of a frictionless
is 9.0 m/s, how much work is done on solid sphere of radius R. (See below.) Prove that
it by the frictional force between the body leaves the sphere when
and
71 . Block 2 shown below slides along a frictionless
table as block 1 falls. Both blocks are attached
by a frictionless pulley. Find the speed of the
blocks after they have each moved 2.0 m.
Assume that they start at rest and that the
pulley has negligible mass. Use and
Access for free at openstax.org

8 • Chapter Review 375
distance h below the point where the string is
supported. If the ball is released when the string
is horizontal, show that h must be greater than
3a/5 if the ball is to swing completely around the
peg.
76 . A block leaves a frictionless inclined surface
horizontally after dropping off by a height h. Find the
73 . A mysterious force acts on all particles along a horizontal distance D where it will land on the floor,
particular line and always points towards a in terms of h, H, and g.
particular point P on the line. The magnitude of
the force on a particle increases as the cube of
the distance from that point; that is ∞ , if the
distance from P to the position of the particle is
r. Let b be the proportionality constant, and
write the magnitude of the force as .
Find the potential energy of a particle subjected
to this force when the particle is at a distance D
from P, assuming the potential energy to be zero
when the particle is at P.
77 . A block of mass m, after sliding down a frictionless
74 . An object of mass 10 kg is released at point A, slides
incline, strikes another block of mass M that is
to the bottom of the incline, then collides with a
attached to a spring of spring constant k (see
horizontal massless spring, compressing it a
below). The blocks stick together upon impact and
maximum distance of 0.75 m. (See below.) The
travel together. (a) Find the compression of the
spring constant is 500 N/m, the height of the incline
spring in terms of m, M, h, g, and k when the
is 2.0 m, and the horizontal surface is frictionless.
combination comes to rest. Hint: The speed of the
(a) What is the speed of the object at the bottom of
combined blocks is based on the speed
the incline? (b) What is the work of friction on the
of block m just prior to the collision with the block M
object while it is on the incline? (c) The spring recoils
and sends the object back toward the incline. What
(v1) based on the equation .
This will be discussed further in the chapter on
is the speed of the object when it reaches the base
Linear Momentum and Collisions. (b) The loss of
of the incline? (d) What vertical distance does it
kinetic energy as a result of the bonding of the two
move back up the incline?
masses upon impact is stored in the so-called
binding energy of the two masses. Calculate the
binding energy.
75 . Shown below is a small ball of mass m attached
to a string of length a. A small peg is located a

376 8 • Chapter Review
78 . A block of mass 300 g is attached to a spring of
spring constant 100 N/m. The other end of the
spring is attached to a support while the block
rests on a smooth horizontal table and can slide
freely without any friction. The block is pushed
horizontally till the spring compresses by 12 cm,
and then the block is released from rest. (a) How
much potential energy was stored in the block-
spring support system when the block was just
released? (b) Determine the speed of the block
when it crosses the point when the spring is
neither compressed nor stretched. (c) Determine
the speed of the block when it has traveled a
distance of 20 cm from where it was released.
79 . Consider a block of mass 0.200 kg attached to a 84 . A 200-g steel ball is tied to a 2.00-m “massless”
spring of spring constant 100 N/m. The block is string and hung from the ceiling to make a
placed on a frictionless table, and the other end pendulum, and then, the ball is brought to a
of the spring is attached to the wall so that the position making a angle with the vertical
spring is level with the table. The block is then direction and released from rest. Ignoring the
pushed in so that the spring is compressed by effects of the air resistance, find the speed of the
10.0 cm. Find the speed of the block as it ball when the string (a) is vertically down, (b)
crosses (a) the point when the spring is not makes an angle of with the vertical and (c)
stretched, (b) 5.00 cm to the left of point in (a), makes an angle of with the vertical.
and (c) 5.00 cm to the right of point in (a).
85 . A 300 g hockey puck is shot across an ice-
80 . A skier starts from rest and slides downhill. covered pond. Before the hockey puck was hit,
What will be the speed of the skier if he drops by the puck was at rest. After the hit, the puck has a
20 meters in vertical height? Ignore any air speed of 40 m/s. The puck comes to rest after
resistance (which will, in reality, be quite a lot), going a distance of 30 m. (a) Describe how the
and any friction between the skis and the snow. energy of the puck changes over time, giving the
numerical values of any work or energy involved.
81 . Repeat the preceding problem, but this time,
(b) Find the magnitude of the net friction force.
suppose that the work done by air resistance
cannot be ignored. Let the work done by the air 86 . A projectile of mass 2 kg is fired with a speed of
resistance when the skier goes from A to B along 20 m/s at an angle of with respect to the
the given hilly path be −2000 J. The work done horizontal. (a) Calculate the initial total energy of
by air resistance is negative since the air the projectile given that the reference point of
resistance acts in the opposite direction to the zero gravitational potential energy at the launch
displacement. Supposing the mass of the skier is position. (b) Calculate the kinetic energy at the
50 kg, what is the speed of the skier at point B? highest vertical position of the projectile. (c)
Calculate the gravitational potential energy at
82 . Two bodies are interacting by a conservative
the highest vertical position. (d) Calculate the
force. Show that the mechanical energy of an
maximum height that the projectile reaches.
isolated system consisting of two bodies
Compare this result by solving the same
interacting with a conservative force is
problem using your knowledge of projectile
conserved. (Hint: Start by using Newton’s third
motion.
law and the definition of work to find the work
done on each body by the conservative force.) 87 . An artillery shell is fired at a target 200 m above
the ground. When the shell is 100 m in the air, it
83 . In an amusement park, a car rolls in a track as
has a speed of 100 m/s. What is its speed when
shown below. Find the speed of the car at A, B, and
it hits its target? Neglect air friction.
C. Note that the work done by the rolling friction is
zero since the displacement of the point at which 88 . How much energy is lost to a dissipative drag
the rolling friction acts on the tires is momentarily at force if a 60-kg person falls at a constant speed
rest and therefore has a zero displacement. for 15 meters?
Access for free at openstax.org

8 • Chapter Review 377
89 . A box slides on a frictionless surface with a total slides on a rough surface, it only compresses the
energy of 50 J. It hits a spring and compresses spring a distance of 15 cm, how much energy
the spring a distance of 25 cm from equilibrium. must have been lost by sliding on the rough
If the same box with the same initial energy surface?

378 8 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 9
Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.1 The concepts of impulse, momentum, and center of mass are crucial for a major-league baseball player to successfully get a
hit. If he misjudges these quantities, he might break his bat instead. (credit: modification of work by “Cathy T”/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
9.1 Linear Momentum
9.2 Impulse and Collisions
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
9.4 Types of Collisions
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
9.6 Center of Mass
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
INTRODUCTION The concepts of work, energy, and the work-energy theorem are valuable for two primary reasons:
First, they are powerful computational tools, making it much easier to analyze complex physical systems than is
possible using Newton’s laws directly (for example, systems with nonconstant forces); and second, the observation
that the total energy of a closed system is conserved means that the system can only evolve in ways that are
consistent with energy conservation. In other words, a system cannot evolve randomly; it can only change in ways
that conserve energy.
In this chapter, we develop and define another conserved quantity, called linear momentum, and another
relationship (the impulse-momentum theorem), which will put an additional constraint on how a system evolves in
time. Conservation of momentum is useful for understanding collisions, such as that shown in the above image. It is
just as powerful, just as important, and just as useful as conservation of energy and the work-energy theorem.

380 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
9.1 Linear Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what momentum is, physically
• Calculate the momentum of a moving object
Our study of kinetic energy showed that a complete understanding of an object’s motion must include both its mass
and its velocity ( ). However, as powerful as this concept is, it does not include any information about
the direction of the moving object’s velocity vector. We’ll now define a physical quantity that includes direction.
Like kinetic energy, this quantity includes both mass and velocity; like kinetic energy, it is a way of characterizing the
“quantity of motion” of an object. It is given the name momentum (from the Latin word movimentum, meaning
“movement”), and it is represented by the symbol p.
MOMENTUM
The momentum p of an object is the product of its mass and its velocity:
9.1
FIGURE 9.2 The velocity and momentum vectors for the ball are in the same direction. (credit: modification of work by Ben Sutherland)
As shown in Figure 9.2, momentum is a vector quantity (since velocity is). This is one of the things that makes
momentum useful and not a duplication of kinetic energy. It is perhaps most useful when determining whether an
object’s motion is difficult to change (Figure 9.3) or easy to change (Figure 9.4) over a short time interval.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.1 • Linear Momentum 381
FIGURE 9.3 This supertanker transports a huge mass of oil; as a consequence, it takes a long time for a force to change its (comparatively
small) velocity. (credit: modification of work by “the_tahoe_guy”/Flickr)
FIGURE 9.4 Gas molecules can have very large velocities, but these velocities change nearly instantaneously when they collide with the
container walls or with each other. This is primarily because their masses are so tiny.
Unlike kinetic energy, momentum depends equally on an object’s mass and velocity. For example, as you will learn
when you study thermodynamics, the average speed of an air molecule at room temperature is approximately 500
m/s, with an average molecular mass of ; its momentum is thus
For comparison, a typical automobile might have a speed of only 15 m/s, but a mass of 1400 kg, giving it a
momentum of
These momenta are different by 27 orders of magnitude, or a factor of a billion billion billion!