# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 230-235
############################################################

220 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
CHAPTER 5 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
charging by induction processbywhichanelectricallychargedobjectbroughtnearaneutralobjectcreatesacharge
separation in that object
conduction electron electron that is free to move away from its atomic orbit
conductor materialthatallowselectronstomoveseparatelyfromtheiratomicorbits;objectwithpropertiesthatallow
charges to move about freely within it
continuous charge distribution totalsourcechargecomposedofsolargeanumberofelementarychargesthatitmust
be treated as continuous, rather than discrete
coulomb SI unit of electric charge
Coulomb force another term for the electrostatic force
Coulomb’s law mathematical equation calculating the electrostatic force vector between two charged particles
dipole two equal and opposite charges that are fixed close to each other
dipole moment propertyofadipole;itcharacterizesthecombinationofdistancebetweentheoppositecharges,andthe
magnitude of the charges
electric charge physical property of an object that causes it to be attracted toward or repelled from another charged
object; each charged object generates and is influenced by a force called an electric force
electric field physical phenomenon created by a charge; it “transmits” a force between a two charges
electric force noncontact force observed between electrically charged objects
electron particle surrounding the nucleus of an atom and carrying the smallest unit of negative charge
electrostatic attraction phenomenon of two objects with opposite charges attracting each other
electrostatic force amountanddirectionofattractionorrepulsionbetweentwochargedbodies;theassumptionisthat
the source charges remain motionless
electrostatic repulsion phenomenon of two objects with like charges repelling each other
electrostatics study of charged objects which are not in motion
field line smooth, usually curved line that indicates the direction of the electric field
field line density numberoffieldlinespersquaremeterpassingthroughanimaginaryarea;itspurposeistoindicatethe
field strength at different points in space
induced dipole typically an atom, or a spherically symmetric molecule; a dipole created due to opposite forces
displacing the positive and negative charges
infinite plane flatsheetinwhichthedimensionsmakinguptheareaaremuch,muchgreaterthanitsthickness,andalso
much, much greater than the distance at which the field is to be calculated; its field is constant
infinite straight wire straight wire whose length is much, much greater than either of its other dimensions, and also
much, much greater than the distance at which the field is to be calculated
insulator material that holds electrons securely within their atomic orbits
ion atom or molecule with more or fewer electrons than protons
law of conservation of charge net electric charge of a closed system is constant
linear charge density amountofchargeinanelementofachargedistributionthatisessentiallyone-dimensional(the
width and height are much, much smaller than its length); its units are C/m
neutron neutral particle in the nucleus of an atom, with (nearly) the same mass as a proton
permanent dipole typically a molecule; a dipole created by the arrangement of the charged particles from which the
dipole is created
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 221
permittivity of vacuum
also called the permittivity offree space, and constant describing the strength ofthe electric
force in a vacuum
polarization slight shifting of positive and negative charges to opposite sides of an object
principle of superposition useful fact that we can simply add up all of the forces due to charges acting on an object
proton particleinthenucleusofanatomandcarryingapositivechargeequalinmagnitudetotheamountofnegative
charge carried by an electron
static electricity buildupofelectricchargeonthesurfaceofanobject;thearrangementofthechargeremainsconstant
(“static”)
superposition conceptthatstatesthatthenetelectricfieldofmultiplesourcechargesisthevectorsumofthefieldof
each source charge calculated individually
surface charge density amount of charge in an element of a two-dimensional charge distribution (the thickness is
small); its units are C/m2
volume charge density amountofchargeinanelementofathree-dimensionalchargedistribution;itsunitsare C/m 3
KEY EQUATIONS
Coulomb’s law → F (r)= 1 q 1 q 2^ r
12 4πε
0
r2 12
12
Superposition of electric forces N
→ F (r)=
4π
1
ε 0
Q
i
∑
=1 r
q
i 2
i^ ri
Electric force due to an electric field → →
F =Q E
Electric field at pointP N
→ E (P)≡
4π
1
ε 0i
∑
=1 r
q
i 2
i^ ri
Field of an infinite wire → E (z)= 4π 1 ε 2 z λ^ k
0
Field of an infinite plane → σ ^
E = k
2ε
0
Dipole moment → →
p ≡q d
Torque on dipole in external E-field →τ
=
→
p ×
→
E
SUMMARY
5.1Electric Charge
• Thereareonlytwotypesofcharge,whichwecallpositiveandnegative.Likechargesrepel,unlikechargesattract,
and the force between charges decreases with the square of the distance.
• Thevastmajorityofpositivechargeinnatureiscarriedbyprotons,whereasthevastmajorityofnegativechargeis
carriedbyelectrons.Theelectricchargeofoneelectronisequalinmagnitudeandoppositeinsigntothechargeof
one proton.
• Anionisanatomormoleculethathasnonzerototalchargeduetohavingunequalnumbersofelectronsandprotons.
• The SI unit for charge is the coulomb (C), with protons and electrons having charges of opposite sign but equal
magnitude; the magnitude of this basic charge is e≡1.602×10 −19 C

222 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
• Both positive and negative charges exist in neutral objects and can be separated by bringing the two objects into
physicalcontact;rubbingtheobjectstogethercanremoveelectronsfromthebondsinoneobjectandplacethemon
the other object, increasing the charge separation.
• Formacroscopicobjects,negativelychargedmeansanexcessofelectronsandpositivelychargedmeansadepletion
of electrons.
• The law of conservation of charge states that the net charge of a closed system is constant.
5.2Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
• A conductor is a substance that allows charge to flow freely through its atomic structure.
• An insulator holds charge fixed in place.
• Polarization is the separation of positive and negative charges in a neutral object. Polarized objects have their
positive and negative charges concentrated in different areas, giving them a charge distribution.
5.3Coulomb's Law
• Coulomb’s law gives the magnitude of the force between point charges. It is
→ F (r)= 1 q 1 q 2^ r
12 4πε
0
r2 12
12
where q and q are two point charges separated by a distance r. This Coulomb force is extremely basic,
2 2
since most charges are due to point-like particles. It is responsible for all electrostatic effects and underlies most
macroscopic forces.
5.4Electric Field
• Theelectricfieldisanalterationofspacecausedbythepresenceofanelectriccharge.Theelectricfieldmediates
the electric force between a source charge and a test charge.
• The electric field, like the electric force, obeys the superposition principle
• The field is a vector; by definition, it points away from positive charges and toward negative charges.
5.5Calculating Electric Fields of Charge Distributions
• Averylargenumberofchargescanbetreatedasacontinuouschargedistribution,wherethecalculationofthefield
requires integration. Common cases are:
◦ one-dimensional (like a wire); uses a line charge density λ
◦ two-dimensional (metal plate); uses surface charge density σ
◦ three-dimensional (metal sphere); uses volume charge density ρ
• The “source charge” is a differential amount of charge dq. Calculating dq depends on the type of source charge
distribution:
dq=λdl; dq=σdA; dq= ρdV.
• Symmetry of the charge distribution is usually key.
• Important special cases are the field of an “infinite” wire and the field of an “infinite” plane.
5.6Electric Field Lines
• Electric field diagrams assist in visualizing the field of a source charge.
• The magnitude of the field is proportional to the field line density.
• Field vectors are everywhere tangent to field lines.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 223
5.7Electric Dipoles
• Ifapermanentdipoleisplacedinanexternalelectricfield,itresultsinatorquethatalignsitwiththeexternalfield.
• Ifanonpolaratom (ormolecule) isplaced inanexternal field, itgainsaninduced dipole that isaligned withthe
external field.
• The net field is the vector sum of the external field plus the field of the dipole (physical or induced).
• The strength of the polarization is described by the dipole moment of the dipole, → p =q → d .
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
5.1Electric Charge
1. There are very large numbers of charged particles in
most objects. Why, then, don’t most objects exhibit static
electricity?
2. Why do most objects tend to contain nearly equal
numbers of positive and negative charges?
3. Apositivelychargedrodattractsasmallpieceofcork.
(a) Can we conclude that the cork is negatively charged?
(b) The rod repels another small piece of cork. Can we
conclude that this piece is positively charged?
4. Twobodiesattracteachotherelectrically.Dotheyboth
havetobecharged?Answerthesamequestionifthebodies
repel one another.
10. Whilewalkingonarug,apersonfrequentlybecomes
5. How would you determine whether the charge on a
chargedbecause oftherubbingbetween hisshoesandthe
particular rod is positive or negative?
rug. This charge then causes a spark and a slight shock
whenthepersongetsclosetoametalobject.Whyarethese
shocks so much more common on a dry day?
5.2Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by
Induction 11. Compare charging by conduction to charging by
induction.
6. Aneccentricinventorattemptstolevitateacorkballby
wrapping it with foil and placing a large negative charge
on the ball and then putting a large positive charge on 12. Smallpiecesoftissueareattractedtoachargedcomb.
the ceiling of his workshop. Instead, while attempting to Soon after sticking to the comb, the pieces of tissue are
placealargenegativechargeontheball,thefoilfliesoff. repelled from it. Explain.
Explain.
13. Trucksthatcarrygasolineoftenhavechainsdangling
7. When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, it becomes from their undercarriages and brushing the ground. Why?
positive and the silk becomes negative—yet both attract
dust. Does the dust have a third type of charge that is 14. Why do electrostatic experiments work so poorly in
attracted to both positive and negative? Explain. humid weather?
8. Why does a car always attract dust right after it is 15. Why do some clothes cling together after being
polished? (Note that car wax and car tires are insulators.) removed from the clothes dryer? Does this happen if
they’re still damp?
9. Doestheunchargedconductorshownbelowexperience
a net electric force? 16. Can induction be used to produce charge on an
insulator?

224 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
17. Suppose someone tells you that rubbing quartz with
cottonclothproducesathirdkindofchargeonthequartz. Distributions
Describe what you might do to test this claim.
27. Giveaplausibleargumentastowhytheelectricfield
outside an infinite charged sheet is constant.
18. Ahandheldcopperroddoesnotacquireachargewhen
you rub it with a cloth. Explain why.
28. Compare the electric fields of an infinite sheet of
charge, an infinite, charged conducting plate, and infinite,
19. Supposeyouplaceachargeqnearalargemetalplate. oppositely charged parallel plates.
(a) If q is attracted to the plate, is the plate necessarily
charged? (b) If q is repelled by the plate, is the plate
29. Describetheelectricfieldsofaninfinitechargedplate
necessarily charged?
and of two infinite, charged parallel plates in terms of the
electric field of an infinite sheet of charge.
5.3Coulomb's Law
30. A negative charge is placed at the center of a ring of
20. Would defining the charge on an electron to be uniformpositivecharge.Whatisthemotion(ifany)ofthe
positive have any effect on Coulomb’s law? charge? What if the charge were placed at a point on the
axis of the ring other than the center?
21. Anatomicnucleuscontainspositivelychargedprotons
andunchargedneutrons.Sincenucleidostaytogether,what
must we conclude about the forces between these nuclear 5.6Electric Field Lines
particles?
31. If a point charge is released from rest in a uniform
electricfield,willitfollowafieldline?Willitdosoifthe
22. Istheforcebetweentwofixedchargesinfluencedby electric field is not uniform?
the presence of other charges?
32. Underwhatconditions,ifany,willthetrajectoryofa
charged particle not follow a field line?
5.4Electric Field
23. When measuring an electric field, could we use a 33. Howwouldyouexperimentallydistinguishanelectric
negative rather than a positive test charge? field from a gravitational field?
24. During fair weather, the electric field due to the net 34. A representation of an electric field shows 10 field
charge on Earth points downward. Is Earth charged linesperpendiculartoasquareplate.Howmanyfieldlines
positively or negatively? should pass perpendicularly through the plate to depict a
field with twice the magnitude?
25. Iftheelectricfieldatapointonthelinebetweentwo
charges is zero, what do you know about the charges? 35. Whatistheratioofthenumberofelectric fieldlines
leaving a charge 10qand a chargeq?
26. Two charges lie along the x-axis. Is it true that the
netelectricfieldalwaysvanishesatsomepoint(otherthan
infinity) along thex-axis? 5.7Electric Dipoles
36. What are the stable orientation(s) for a dipole in an
external electric field? What happens if the dipole is
5.5Calculating Electric Fields of Charge slightly perturbed from these orientations?
PROBLEMS
38. If 1.80×10 20 electrons move through a pocket
5.1Electric Charge
calculator during a full day’s operation, how many
37. Common static electricity involves charges ranging coulombs of charge moved through it?
from nanocoulombs to microcoulombs. (a) How many
electronsareneededtoformachargeof−2.00nC?(b)How
39. To start a car engine, the car battery moves
many electrons must be removed from a neutral object to
leave a net charge of 0.500µC?
3.75×1021 electrons through the starter motor. How
many coulombs of charge were moved?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9