# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 171-178
############################################################

4.2 • Acceleration Vector 159
FIGURE 4.10 A skier has an acceleration of down a slope of The origin of the coordinate system is at the ski lodge.
Strategy
Since we are evaluating the components of the motion equations in the x and y directions, we need to find the
components of the acceleration and put them into the kinematic equations. The components of the acceleration are
found by referring to the coordinate system in Figure 4.10. Then, by inserting the components of the initial position
and velocity into the motion equations, we can solve for her position and velocity at a later time t.
Solution
(a) The origin of the coordinate system is at the top of the hill with y-axis vertically upward and the x-axis horizontal.
By looking at the trajectory of the skier, the x-component of the acceleration is positive and the y-component is
negative. Since the angle is down the slope, we find
Inserting the initial position and velocity into Equation 4.12 and Equation 4.13 for x, we have
For y, we have
(b) Now that we have the equations of motion for x and y as functions of time, we can evaluate them at t = 10.0 s:

160 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
The position and velocity at t = 10.0 s are, finally,
The magnitude of the velocity of the skier at 10.0 s is 25 m/s, which is 60 mi/h.
Significance
It is useful to know that, given the initial conditions of position, velocity, and acceleration of an object, we can find
the position, velocity, and acceleration at any later time.
With Equation 4.8 through Equation 4.10 we have completed the set of expressions for the position, velocity, and
acceleration of an object moving in two or three dimensions. If the trajectories of the objects look something like the
“Red Arrows” in the opening picture for the chapter, then the expressions for the position, velocity, and acceleration
can be quite complicated. In the sections to follow we examine two special cases of motion in two and three
dimensions by looking at projectile motion and circular motion.
INTERACTIVE
At this University of Colorado Boulder website (https://openstax.org/l/21phetmotladyb), you can explore the
position velocity and acceleration of a ladybug with an interactive simulation that allows you to change these
parameters.
4.3 Projectile Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use one-dimensional motion in perpendicular directions to analyze projectile motion.
• Calculate the range, time of flight, and maximum height of a projectile that is launched and impacts a flat,
horizontal surface.
• Find the time of flight and impact velocity of a projectile that lands at a different height from that of
launch.
• Calculate the trajectory of a projectile.
Projectile motion is the motion of an object thrown or projected into the air, subject only to acceleration as a result
of gravity. The applications of projectile motion in physics and engineering are numerous. Some examples include
meteors as they enter Earth’s atmosphere, fireworks, and the motion of any ball in sports. Such objects are called
projectiles and their path is called a trajectory. The motion of falling objects as discussed in Motion Along a Straight
Line is a simple one-dimensional type of projectile motion in which there is no horizontal movement. In this section,
we consider two-dimensional projectile motion, and our treatment neglects the effects of air resistance.
The most important fact to remember here is that motions along perpendicular axes are independent and thus can
be analyzed separately. We discussed this fact in Displacement and Velocity Vectors, where we saw that vertical and
horizontal motions are independent. The key to analyzing two-dimensional projectile motion is to break it into two
motions: one along the horizontal axis and the other along the vertical. (This choice of axes is the most sensible
because acceleration resulting from gravity is vertical; thus, there is no acceleration along the horizontal axis when
air resistance is negligible.) As is customary, we call the horizontal axis the x-axis and the vertical axis the y-axis. It
is not required that we use this choice of axes; it is simply convenient in the case of gravitational acceleration. In
other cases we may choose a different set of axes. Figure 4.11 illustrates the notation for displacement, where we
define to be the total displacement, and and are its component vectors along the horizontal and vertical axes,
respectively. The magnitudes of these vectors are s, x, and y.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.3 • Projectile Motion 161
FIGURE 4.11 The total displacement s of a soccer ball at a point along its path. The vector has components and along the horizontal
and vertical axes. Its magnitude is s and it makes an angle Φ with the horizontal.
To describe projectile motion completely, we must include velocity and acceleration, as well as displacement. We
must find their components along the x- and y-axes. Let’s assume all forces except gravity (such as air resistance
and friction, for example) are negligible. Defining the positive direction to be upward, the components of
acceleration are then very simple:
Because gravity is vertical, If this means the initial velocity in the x direction is equal to the final
velocity in the x direction, or With these conditions on acceleration and velocity, we can write the
kinematic Equation 4.11 through Equation 4.18 for motion in a uniform gravitational field, including the rest of the
kinematic equations for a constant acceleration from Motion with Constant Acceleration. The kinematic equations
for motion in a uniform gravitational field become kinematic equations with
Horizontal Motion
4.19
Vertical Motion
4.20
4.21
4.22
4.23
Using this set of equations, we can analyze projectile motion, keeping in mind some important points.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Projectile Motion
1. Resolve the motion into horizontal and vertical components along the x- and y-axes. The magnitudes of the
components of displacement along these axes are x and y. The magnitudes of the components of velocity
are where v is the magnitude of the velocity and θ is its direction relative to the
horizontal, as shown in Figure 4.12.

162 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
2. Treat the motion as two independent one-dimensional motions: one horizontal and the other vertical. Use the
kinematic equations for horizontal and vertical motion presented earlier.
3. Solve for the unknowns in the two separate motions: one horizontal and one vertical. Note that the only
common variable between the motions is time t. The problem-solving procedures here are the same as those
for one-dimensional kinematics and are illustrated in the following solved examples.
4. Recombine quantities in the horizontal and vertical directions to find the total displacement and velocity
Solve for the magnitude and direction of the displacement and velocity using
where Φ is the direction of the displacement
FIGURE 4.12 (a) We analyze two-dimensional projectile motion by breaking it into two independent one-dimensional motions along the
vertical and horizontal axes. (b) The horizontal motion is simple, because and is a constant. (c) The velocity in the vertical
direction begins to decrease as the object rises. At its highest point, the vertical velocity is zero. As the object falls toward Earth again, the
vertical velocity increases again in magnitude but points in the opposite direction to the initial vertical velocity. (d) The x and y motions are
recombined to give the total velocity at any given point on the trajectory.
EXAMPLE 4.7
A Fireworks Projectile Explodes High and Away
During a fireworks display, a shell is shot into the air with an initial speed of 70.0 m/s at an angle of above the
horizontal, as illustrated in Figure 4.13. The fuse is timed to ignite the shell just as it reaches its highest point above
the ground. (a) Calculate the height at which the shell explodes. (b) How much time passes between the launch of
the shell and the explosion? (c) What is the horizontal displacement of the shell when it explodes? (d) What is the
total displacement from the point of launch to the highest point?
Access for free at openstax.org

4.3 • Projectile Motion 163
FIGURE 4.13 The trajectory of a fireworks shell. The fuse is set to explode the shell at the highest point in its trajectory, which is found to be
at a height of 233 m and 125 m away horizontally.
Strategy
The motion can be broken into horizontal and vertical motions in which and We can then define
and to be zero and solve for the desired quantities.
Solution
(a) By “height” we mean the altitude or vertical position y above the starting point. The highest point in any
trajectory, called the apex, is reached when Since we know the initial and final velocities, as well as the
initial position, we use the following equation to find y:
Because and are both zero, the equation simplifies to
Solving for y gives
Now we must find the component of the initial velocity in the y direction. It is given by where
is the initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and is the initial angle. Thus,
and y is
Thus, we have
Note that because up is positive, the initial vertical velocity is positive, as is the maximum height, but the
acceleration resulting from gravity is negative. Note also that the maximum height depends only on the vertical
component of the initial velocity, so that any projectile with a 67.6-m/s initial vertical component of velocity reaches
a maximum height of 233 m (neglecting air resistance). The numbers in this example are reasonable for large
fireworks displays, the shells of which do reach such heights before exploding. In practice, air resistance is not
completely negligible, so the initial velocity would have to be somewhat larger than that given to reach the same
height.

164 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
(b) As in many physics problems, there is more than one way to solve for the time the projectile reaches its highest
point. In this case, the easiest method is to use Because at the apex, this equation reduces
to simply
or
This time is also reasonable for large fireworks. If you are able to see the launch of fireworks, notice that several
seconds pass before the shell explodes. Another way of finding the time is by using This is
left for you as an exercise to complete.
(c) Because air resistance is negligible, and the horizontal velocity is constant, as discussed earlier. The
horizontal displacement is the horizontal velocity multiplied by time as given by where is equal to
zero. Thus,
where is the x-component of the velocity, which is given by
Time t for both motions is the same, so x is
Horizontal motion is a constant velocity in the absence of air resistance. The horizontal displacement found here
could be useful in keeping the fireworks fragments from falling on spectators. When the shell explodes, air
resistance has a major effect, and many fragments land directly below.
(d) The horizontal and vertical components of the displacement were just calculated, so all that is needed here is to
find the magnitude and direction of the displacement at the highest point:
Note that the angle for the displacement vector is less than the initial angle of launch. To see why this is, review
Figure 4.11, which shows the curvature of the trajectory toward the ground level.
When solving Example 4.7(a), the expression we found for y is valid for any projectile motion when air resistance is
negligible. Call the maximum height y = h. Then,
This equation defines the maximum height of a projectile above its launch position and it depends only on the
vertical component of the initial velocity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.3
A rock is thrown horizontally off a cliff high with a velocity of 15.0 m/s. (a) Define the origin of the
coordinate system. (b) Which equation describes the horizontal motion? (c) Which equations describe the vertical
motion? (d) What is the rock’s velocity at the point of impact?
Access for free at openstax.org

4.3 • Projectile Motion 165
EXAMPLE 4.8
Calculating Projectile Motion: Tennis Player
A tennis player wins a match at Arthur Ashe stadium and hits a ball into the stands at 30 m/s and at an angle
above the horizontal (Figure 4.14). On its way down, the ball is caught by a spectator 10 m above the point where
the ball was hit. (a) Calculate the time it takes the tennis ball to reach the spectator. (b) What are the magnitude and
direction of the ball’s velocity at impact?
FIGURE 4.14 The trajectory of a tennis ball hit into the stands.
Strategy
Again, resolving this two-dimensional motion into two independent one-dimensional motions allows us to solve for
the desired quantities. The time a projectile is in the air is governed by its vertical motion alone. Thus, we solve for t
first. While the ball is rising and falling vertically, the horizontal motion continues at a constant velocity. This
example asks for the final velocity. Thus, we recombine the vertical and horizontal results to obtain at final time t,
determined in the first part of the example.
Solution
(a) While the ball is in the air, it rises and then falls to a final position 10.0 m higher than its starting altitude. We can
find the time for this by using Equation 4.22:
If we take the initial position to be zero, then the final position is y = 10 m. The initial vertical velocity is the
vertical component of the initial velocity:
Substituting into Equation 4.22 for y gives us
Rearranging terms gives a quadratic equation in t:
Use of the quadratic formula yields t = 3.79 s and t = 0.54 s. Since the ball is at a height of 10 m at two times during
its trajectory—once on the way up and once on the way down—we take the longer solution for the time it takes the
ball to reach the spectator: