# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 172-179
############################################################

164 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
Figure 4.18 (a) Graph of intensity of the diffraction pattern for a circular aperture. Note
that, similar to a single slit, the central maximum is wider and brighter than those to the sides.
(b) Two point objects produce overlapping diffraction patterns. Shown here is the Rayleigh
criterion for being just resolvable. The central maximum of one pattern lies on the first
minimum of the other.
Allattemptstoobservethesizeandshapeofobjectsarelimitedbythewavelengthoftheprobe.Eventhesmallwavelength
oflightprohibitsexactprecision.Whenextremelysmallwavelengthprobesareused,aswithanelectronmicroscope,the
system is disturbed, still limiting our knowledge. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle asserts that this limit is fundamental
and inescapable, as we shall see in the chapter on quantum mechanics.
Example 4.6
Calculating Diffraction Limits of the Hubble Space Telescope
TheprimarymirroroftheorbitingHubbleSpaceTelescopehasadiameterof2.40m.Beinginorbit,thistelescope
avoidsthedegradingeffectsofatmosphericdistortiononitsresolution.(a)Whatistheanglebetweentwojust-
resolvablepointlightsources(perhapstwostars)?Assumeanaveragelightwavelengthof550nm.(b)Ifthese
two stars are at a distance of 2 million light-years, which is the distance of the Andromeda Galaxy, how close
together can they be and still be resolved? (A light-year, or ly, is the distance light travels in 1 year.)
Strategy
TheRayleighcriterionstatedinEquation4.5, θ=1.22λ/D,givesthesmallestpossibleangle θ betweenpoint
sources, orthebest obtainable resolution. Once this angle isknown,wecancalculate thedistance between the
stars, since we are given how far away they are.
Solution
a. The Rayleigh criterion for the minimum resolvable angle is
θ=1.22 λ .
D
Entering known values gives
−9
θ=1.22 550×10 m =2.80×10 −7 rad.
2.40m
b. The distancesbetween two objects a distanceraway and separated by an angle θ is s=rθ.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 165
Substituting known values gives
s= ⎛ 2.0×10 6 ly ⎞⎛ 2.80×10 −7 rad ⎞ =0.56ly.
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠
Significance
Theanglefoundinpart(a)isextraordinarilysmall(lessthan1/50,000ofadegree),becausetheprimarymirror
issolargecomparedwiththewavelengthoflight.Asnoticed,diffractioneffectsaremostnoticeablewhenlight
interactswithobjectshavingsizesontheorderofthewavelengthoflight.However,theeffectisstillthere,and
there is a diffraction limit to what is observable. The actual resolution of the Hubble Telescope is not quite as
good as that found here. As with all instruments, there are other effects, such as nonuniformities in mirrors or
aberrations in lenses that further limit resolution. However, Figure 4.19 gives an indication of the extent of
thedetailobservablewiththeHubblebecauseofitssizeandquality,andespeciallybecauseitisaboveEarth’s
atmosphere.
Figure 4.19 These two photographs of the M82 Galaxy give an idea of the
observable detail using (a) a ground-based telescope and (b) the Hubble Space
Telescope. (credit a: modification of work by “Ricnun”/Wikimedia Commons; credit
b: modification of work by NASA, ESA, and The Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/
AURA))
Theanswerinpart(b)indicatesthattwostarsseparatedbyabouthalfalight-yearcanberesolved.Theaverage
distancebetweenstarsinagalaxyisontheorderoffivelight-yearsintheouterpartsandaboutonelight-year
near the galactic center. Therefore, the Hubble can resolve most of the individual stars in Andromeda Galaxy,
even though it lies at such a huge distance that its light takes 2 million years to reach us. Figure 4.20 shows
another mirror used to observe radio waves from outer space.

166 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
Figure 4.20 A 305-m-diameter paraboloid at Arecibo in
Puerto Rico is lined with reflective material, making it into a
radio telescope. It is the largest curved focusing dish in the
world. AlthoughDfor Arecibo is much larger than for the
Hubble Telescope, it detects radiation of a much longer
wavelength and its diffraction limit is significantly poorer than
Hubble’s. The Arecibo telescope is still very useful, because
important information is carried by radio waves that is not
carried by visible light. (credit: Jeff Hitchcock)
4.5 CheckYourUnderstandingWhatistheangularresolutionoftheArecibotelescopeshowninFigure
4.20when operated at 21-cm wavelength? How does it compare to the resolution of the Hubble Telescope?
Diffractionisnotonlyaproblemforopticalinstrumentsbutalsofortheelectromagneticradiationitself.Anybeamoflight
havingafinitediameterDandawavelength λ exhibitsdiffractionspreading.Thebeamspreadsoutwithanangle θ given
byEquation4.5, θ=1.22λ/D.Take,forexample,alaserbeammadeofraysasparallelaspossible(anglesbetweenrays
as close to θ=0° as possible) instead spreads out at an angle θ=1.22λ/D, where D is the diameter of the beam and
λ isitswavelength.Thisspreadingisimpossibletoobserveforaflashlightbecauseitsbeamisnotveryparalleltostart
with.However,forlong-distancetransmissionoflaserbeamsormicrowavesignals,diffractionspreadingcanbesignificant
(Figure4.21).Toavoidthis,wecanincreaseD.Thisisdoneforlaserlightsenttothemoontomeasureitsdistancefrom
Earth. The laser beam is expanded through a telescope to makeDmuch larger and θ smaller.
Figure 4.21 The beam produced by this microwave
transmission antenna spreads out at a minimum angle
θ=1.22λ/D due to diffraction. It is impossible to produce a
near-parallel beam because the beam has a limited diameter.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 167
Inmostbiologylaboratories,resolutionisanissuewhentheuseofthemicroscopeisintroduced.Thesmallerthedistancex
bywhichtwoobjectscanbeseparatedandstillbeseenasdistinct,thegreatertheresolution.Theresolvingpowerofalens
is defined as that distance x. An expression for resolving power is obtained from the Rayleigh criterion. Figure 4.22(a)
shows two point objects separated by a distance x. According to the Rayleigh criterion, resolution is possible when the
minimum angular separation is
θ=1.22 λ = x ,
D d
wheredisthedistancebetweenthespecimenandtheobjectivelens,andwehaveusedthesmallangleapproximation(i.e.,
we have assumed thatxis much smaller thand), so that tanθ≈ sinθ≈θ. Therefore, the resolving power is
x=1.22
λd
.
D
Anotherwaytolookatthisisbytheconceptofnumericalaperture(NA),whichisameasureofthemaximumacceptance
angleatwhichalenswilltakelightandstillcontainitwithinthelens.Figure4.22(b)showsalensandanobjectatpoint
P.TheNAhereisameasureoftheabilityofthelenstogatherlightandresolvefinedetail.Theanglesubtendedbythelens
at its focus is defined to be θ=2α. From the figure and again using the small angle approximation, we can write
sinα=
D/2
=
D
.
d 2d
TheNAforalensis NA=nsinα,wherenistheindexofrefractionofthemediumbetweentheobjectivelensandthe
object at pointP. From this definition forNA, we can see that
x=1.22 λd =1.22 λ =0.61 λn .
D 2sinα NA
Inamicroscope,NAisimportantbecauseitrelatestotheresolvingpowerofalens.AlenswithalargeNAisabletoresolve
finerdetails.LenseswithlargerNAarealsoabletocollectmorelightandsogiveabrighterimage.Anotherwaytodescribe
thissituationisthatthelargertheNA,thelargertheconeoflightthatcanbebroughtintothelens,somoreofthediffraction
modes are collected. Thus the microscope has more information to form a clear image, and its resolving power is higher.
Figure 4.22 (a) Two points separated by a distancexand positioned a
distancedaway from the objective. (b) Terms and symbols used in
discussion of resolving power for a lens and an object at pointP(credit a:
modification of work by “Infopro”/Wikimedia Commons).
Oneoftheconsequencesofdiffractionisthatthefocalpointofabeamhasafinitewidthandintensitydistribution.Imagine

168 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
focusingwhenonlyconsideringgeometricoptics,asinFigure 4.23(a).Thefocalpointisregardedasaninfinitelysmall
point with a huge intensity and the capacity to incinerate most samples, irrespective of the NA of the objective lens—an
unphysical oversimplification. For wave optics, due to diffraction, we take into account the phenomenon in which the
focal point spreads to become a focal spot (Figure 4.23(b)) with the size of the spot decreasing with increasing NA.
Consequently, the intensity in the focal spot increases with increasing NA. The higher the NA, the greater the chances of
photodegrading the specimen. However, the spot never becomes a true point.
Figure 4.23 (a) In geometric optics, the focus is modelled as a point, but it is not physically possible to produce such a
point because it implies infinite intensity. (b) In wave optics, the focus is an extended region.
In a different type of microscope, molecules within a specimen are made to emit light through a mechanism called
fluorescence.Bycontrollingthemoleculesemittinglight,ithasbecomepossibletoconstructimageswithresolutionmuch
finerthantheRayleighcriterion,thuscircumventingthediffractionlimit.Thedevelopmentofsuper-resolvedfluorescence
microscopy led to the 2014 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
InthisOpticalResolutionModel,twodiffractionpatternsforlightthroughtwocircularaperturesareshownside
bysideinthissimulation(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21optresmodsim)byFu-KwunHwang.Watch
the patterns merge as you decrease the aperture diameters.
4.6 | X-Ray Diffraction
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe interference and diffraction effects exhibited by X-rays in interaction with atomic-scale
structures
Since X-ray photons are very energetic, they have relatively short wavelengths, on the order of 10 −8 m to 10−12 m.
Thus,typicalX-rayphotonsactlikerayswhentheyencountermacroscopicobjects,liketeeth,andproducesharpshadows.
However,sinceatomsareontheorderof0.1nminsize,X-rayscanbeusedtodetectthelocation,shape,andsizeofatoms
andmolecules.TheprocessiscalledX-raydiffraction,anditinvolvestheinterferenceofX-raystoproducepatternsthat
can be analyzed for information about the structures that scattered the X-rays.
PerhapsthemostfamousexampleofX-raydiffractionisthediscoveryofthedouble-helicalstructureofDNAin1953byan
internationalteamofscientistsworkingatEngland’sCavendishLaboratory—AmericanJamesWatson,EnglishmanFrancis
Crick, and New Zealand-born Maurice Wilkins. Using X-ray diffraction data produced by Rosalind Franklin, they were
the first to model the double-helix structure of DNA that is so crucial to life. For this work, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins
wereawardedthe1962NobelPrizeinPhysiologyorMedicine.(Thereissomedebateandcontroversyovertheissuethat
Rosalind Franklin was not included in the prize, although she died in 1958, before the prize was awarded.)
Figure4.24showsadiffractionpatternproducedbythescatteringofX-raysfromacrystal.ThisprocessisknownasX-ray
crystallographybecauseoftheinformationitcanyieldaboutcrystalstructure,anditwasthetypeofdataRosalindFranklin
supplied to Watson and Crick for DNA. Not only do X-rays confirm the size and shape of atoms, they give information
about the atomic arrangements in materials. For example, more recent research in high-temperature superconductors
involvescomplexmaterialswhoselatticearrangementsarecrucialtoobtainingasuperconductingmaterial.Thesecanbe
studied using X-ray crystallography.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 4 | Diffraction 169
Figure 4.24 X-ray diffraction from the crystal of a protein
(hen egg lysozyme) produced this interference pattern. Analysis
of the pattern yields information about the structure of the
protein. (credit: “Del45”/Wikimedia Commons)
Historically,thescatteringofX-raysfromcrystalswasusedtoprovethatX-raysareenergeticelectromagnetic(EM)waves.
ThiswassuspectedfromthetimeofthediscoveryofX-raysin1895,butitwasnotuntil1912thattheGermanMaxvon
Laue(1879–1960)convincedtwoofhiscolleaguestoscatterX-raysfromcrystals.Ifadiffractionpatternisobtained,he
reasoned, then the X-rays must be waves, and their wavelength could be determined. (The spacing of atoms in various
crystals was reasonably well known at the time, based on good values for Avogadro’s number.) The experiments were
convincing,andthe1914NobelPrizeinPhysicswasgiventovonLaueforhissuggestionleadingtotheproofthatX-rays
are EM waves. In 1915, the unique father-and-son team of Sir William Henry Bragg and his son Sir William Lawrence
Bragg were awarded a joint Nobel Prize for inventing the X-ray spectrometer and the then-new science of X-ray analysis.
Inwaysreminiscentofthin-filminterference,weconsidertwoplanewavesatX-raywavelengths,eachonereflectingoff
a different plane of atoms within a crystal’s lattice, as shown in Figure 4.25. From the geometry, the difference in path
lengths is 2dsinθ. Constructive interference results when this distance is an integer multiple of the wavelength. This
condition is captured by theBragg equation,
mλ=2dsinθ, m=1, 2, 3... (4.6)
wheremisapositiveintegeranddisthespacingbetweentheplanes.FollowingtheLawofReflection,boththeincident
andreflectedwavesaredescribedbythesameangle, θ, butunlikethegeneralpracticeingeometricoptics, θ ismeasured
with respect to the surface itself, rather than the normal.

170 Chapter 4 | Diffraction
Figure 4.25 X-ray diffraction with a crystal. Two incident waves reflect off two
planes of a crystal. The difference in path lengths is indicated by the dashed line.
Example 4.7
X-Ray Diffraction with Salt Crystals
CommontablesaltiscomposedmainlyofNaClcrystals.InaNaClcrystal,thereisafamilyofplanes0.252nm
apart.Ifthefirst-ordermaximumisobservedatanincidenceangleof 18.1°,whatisthewavelengthoftheX-ray
scattering from this crystal?
Strategy
Use the Bragg equation,Equation 4.6, mλ=2dsinθ, to solve for θ.
Solution
For first-order, m=1, and the plane spacingdis known. Solving the Bragg equation for wavelength yields
⎛ −9 ⎞
20.252×10 m sin(18.1°)
2dsinθ ⎝ ⎠ −10
λ= m = =1.57×10 m, or0.157nm.
1
Significance
ThedeterminedwavelengthfitswithintheX-rayregionoftheelectromagneticspectrum.Onceagain,thewave
nature of light makes itself prominent when the wavelength (λ=0.157nm) is comparable to the size of the
physical structures (d =0.252nm⎞ it interacts with.
⎠
4.6 Check Your Understanding For the experiment described in Example 4.7, what are the two other
angles where interference maxima may be observed? What limits the number of maxima?
Although Figure 4.25 depicts a crystal as a two-dimensional array of scattering centers for simplicity, real crystals are
structuresinthreedimensions.Scatteringcanoccursimultaneouslyfromdifferentfamiliesofplanesatdifferentorientations
andspacingpatterns knownascalled Braggplanes,asshowninFigure 4.26.Theresulting interference pattern canbe
quite complex.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9