# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 126-134
############################################################

114 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Getting a Feel for Acceleration
You are probably used to experiencing acceleration when you step into an elevator, or step on the gas pedal in your
car. However, acceleration is happening to many other objects in our universe with which we don’t have direct
contact. Table 3.2 presents the acceleration of various objects. We can see the magnitudes of the accelerations
extend over many orders of magnitude.
Acceleration Value (m/s2)
High-speed train 0.25
Elevator 2
Cheetah 5
Object in a free fall without air resistance near the surface of Earth 9.8
Space shuttle maximum during launch 29
Parachutist peak during normal opening of parachute 59
F16 aircraft pulling out of a dive 79
Explosive seat ejection from aircraft 147
Sprint missile 982
Fastest rocket sled peak acceleration 1540
Jumping flea 3200
Baseball struck by a bat 30,000
Closing jaws of a trap-jaw ant 1,000,000
Proton in the large Hadron collider
TABLE 3.2 Typical Values of Acceleration (credit: Wikipedia: Orders of Magnitude (acceleration))
In this table, we see that typical accelerations vary widely with different objects and have nothing to do with object
size or how massive it is. Acceleration can also vary widely with time during the motion of an object. A drag racer has
a large acceleration just after its start, but then it tapers off as the vehicle reaches a constant velocity. Its average
acceleration can be quite different from its instantaneous acceleration at a particular time during its motion. Figure
3.17 compares graphically average acceleration with instantaneous acceleration for two very different motions.
Access for free at openstax.org

3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 115
FIGURE 3.17 Graphs of instantaneous acceleration versus time for two different one-dimensional motions. (a) Acceleration varies only
slightly and is always in the same direction, since it is positive. The average over the interval is nearly the same as the acceleration at any
given time. (b) Acceleration varies greatly, perhaps representing a package on a post office conveyor belt that is accelerated forward and
backward as it bumps along. It is necessary to consider small time intervals (such as from 0–1.0 s) with constant or nearly constant
acceleration in such a situation.
INTERACTIVE
Learn about position, velocity, and acceleration graphs. Move the little man back and forth with a mouse and plot his
motion. Set the position, velocity, or acceleration and let the simulation move the man for you. Visit this link
(https://openstax.org/l/21movmansimul) to use the moving man simulation.
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify which equations of motion are to be used to solve for unknowns.
• Use appropriate equations of motion to solve a two-body pursuit problem.
You might guess that the greater the acceleration of a car moving away from a stop sign, the greater the car’s
displacement in a given time. But, we have not developed a specific equation that relates acceleration and
displacement. In this section, we look at some convenient equations for kinematic relationships, starting from the
definitions of displacement, velocity, and acceleration. We first investigate a single object in motion, called single-
body motion. Then we investigate the motion of two objects, called two-body pursuit problems.
Notation
First, let us make some simplifications in notation. Taking the initial time to be zero, as if time is measured with a
stopwatch, is a great simplification. Since elapsed time is , taking means that , the final
time on the stopwatch. When initial time is taken to be zero, we use the subscript 0 to denote initial values of
position and velocity. That is, is the initial position and is the initial velocity. We put no subscripts on the final
values. That is, t is the final time, x is the final position, and v is the final velocity. This gives a simpler expression for
elapsed time, . It also simplifies the expression for x displacement, which is now . Also, it
simplifies the expression for change in velocity, which is now . To summarize, using the simplified
notation, with the initial time taken to be zero,

116 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
where the subscript 0 denotes an initial value and the absence of a subscript denotes a final value in whatever
motion is under consideration.
We now make the important assumption that acceleration is constant. This assumption allows us to avoid using
calculus to find instantaneous acceleration. Since acceleration is constant, the average and instantaneous
accelerations are equal—that is,
Thus, we can use the symbol a for acceleration at all times. Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriously
limit the situations we can study nor does it degrade the accuracy of our treatment. For one thing, acceleration is
constant in a great number of situations. Furthermore, in many other situations we can describe motion accurately
by assuming a constant acceleration equal to the average acceleration for that motion. Lastly, for motion during
which acceleration changes drastically, such as a car accelerating to top speed and then braking to a stop, motion
can be considered in separate parts, each of which has its own constant acceleration.
Displacement and Position from Velocity
To get our first two equations, we start with the definition of average velocity:
Substituting the simplified notation for and yields
Solving for x gives us
3.10
where the average velocity is
3.11
The equation reflects the fact that when acceleration is constant, is just the simple average of the initial
and final velocities. Figure 3.18 illustrates this concept graphically. In part (a) of the figure, acceleration is constant,
with velocity increasing at a constant rate. The average velocity during the 1-h interval from 40 km/h to 80 km/h is
60 km/h:
In part (b), acceleration is not constant. During the 1-h interval, velocity is closer to 80 km/h than 40 km/h. Thus,
the average velocity is greater than in part (a).
Access for free at openstax.org

3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 117
FIGURE 3.18 (a) Velocity-versus-time graph with constant acceleration showing the initial and final velocities . The average
velocity is . (b) Velocity-versus-time graph with an acceleration that changes with time. The average velocity is not
given by , but is greater than 60 km/h.
Solving for Final Velocity from Acceleration and Time
We can derive another useful equation by manipulating the definition of acceleration:
Substituting the simplified notation for and gives us
Solving for v yields
3.12
EXAMPLE 3.7
Calculating Final Velocity
An airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and then accelerates opposite to the motion at 1.50 m/s2 for
40.0 s. What is its final velocity?
Strategy
First, we identify the knowns: .
Second, we identify the unknown; in this case, it is final velocity .
Last, we determine which equation to use. To do this we figure out which kinematic equation gives the unknown in
terms of the knowns. We calculate the final velocity using Equation 3.12, .
Solution
Substitute the known values and solve:
Figure 3.19 is a sketch that shows the acceleration and velocity vectors.

118 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.19 The airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and slows to a final velocity of 10.0 m/s before heading for the terminal.
Note the acceleration is negative because its direction is opposite to its velocity, which is positive.
Significance
The final velocity is much less than the initial velocity, as desired when slowing down, but is still positive (see figure).
With jet engines, reverse thrust can be maintained long enough to stop the plane and start moving it backward,
which is indicated by a negative final velocity, but is not the case here.
In addition to being useful in problem solving, the equation gives us insight into the relationships
among velocity, acceleration, and time. We can see, for example, that
• Final velocity depends on how large the acceleration is and how long it lasts
• If the acceleration is zero, then the final velocity equals the initial velocity (v = v0), as expected (in other
words, velocity is constant)
• If a is negative, then the final velocity is less than the initial velocity
All these observations fit our intuition. Note that it is always useful to examine basic equations in light of our
intuition and experience to check that they do indeed describe nature accurately.
Solving for Final Position with Constant Acceleration
We can combine the previous equations to find a third equation that allows us to calculate the final position of an
object experiencing constant acceleration. We start with
Adding to each side of this equation and dividing by 2 gives
Since for constant acceleration, we have
Now we substitute this expression for into the equation for displacement, , yielding
3.13
EXAMPLE 3.8
Calculating Displacement of an Accelerating Object
Dragsters can achieve an average acceleration of 26.0 m/s2. Suppose a dragster accelerates from rest at this rate
for 5.56 s (Figure 3.20). How far does it travel in this time?
Access for free at openstax.org

3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 119
FIGURE 3.20 U.S. Army Top Fuel pilot Tony “The Sarge” Schumacher begins a race with a controlled burnout. (credit: Lt. Col. William
Thurmond. Photo Courtesy of U.S. Army.)
Strategy
First, let’s draw a sketch (Figure 3.21). We are asked to find displacement, which is x if we take to be zero. (Think
about as the starting line of a race. It can be anywhere, but we call it zero and measure all other positions relative
to it.) We can use the equation when we identify , , and t from the statement of the
problem.
FIGURE 3.21 Sketch of an accelerating dragster.
Solution
First, we need to identify the knowns. Starting from rest means that , a is given as 26.0 m/s2 and t is given as
5.56 s.
Second, we substitute the known values into the equation to solve for the unknown:
Since the initial position and velocity are both zero, this equation simplifies to
Substituting the identified values of a and t gives
Significance
If we convert 402 m to miles, we find that the distance covered is very close to one-quarter of a mile, the standard
distance for drag racing. So, our answer is reasonable. This is an impressive displacement to cover in only 5.56 s,

120 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
but top-notch dragsters can do a quarter mile in even less time than this. If the dragster were given an initial
velocity, this would add another term to the distance equation. If the same acceleration and time are used in the
equation, the distance covered would be much greater.
What else can we learn by examining the equation We can see the following relationships:
• Displacement depends on the square of the elapsed time when acceleration is not zero. In Example 3.8, the
dragster covers only one-fourth of the total distance in the first half of the elapsed time.
• If acceleration is zero, then initial velocity equals average velocity , and
Solving for Final Velocity from Distance and Acceleration
A fourth useful equation can be obtained from another algebraic manipulation of previous equations. If we solve
for t, we get
Substituting this and into , we get
3.14
EXAMPLE 3.9
Calculating Final Velocity
Calculate the final velocity of the dragster in Example 3.8 without using information about time.
Strategy
The equation is ideally suited to this task because it relates velocities, acceleration, and
displacement, and no time information is required.
Solution
First, we identify the known values. We know that v0 = 0, since the dragster starts from rest. We also know that x −
x0 = 402 m (this was the answer in Example 3.8). The average acceleration was given by a = 26.0 m/s2.
Second, we substitute the knowns into the equation and solve for v:
Thus,
Significance
A velocity of 145 m/s is about 522 km/h, or about 324 mi/h, but even this breakneck speed is short of the record for
the quarter mile. Also, note that a square root has two values; we took the positive value to indicate a velocity in the
same direction as the acceleration.
An examination of the equation can produce additional insights into the general relationships
among physical quantities:
• The final velocity depends on how large the acceleration is and the distance over which it acts.
Access for free at openstax.org

3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 121
• For a fixed acceleration, a car that is going twice as fast doesn’t simply stop in twice the distance. It takes
much farther to stop. (This is why we have reduced speed zones near schools.)
Putting Equations Together
In the following examples, we continue to explore one-dimensional motion, but in situations requiring slightly more
algebraic manipulation. The examples also give insight into problem-solving techniques. The note that follows is
provided for easy reference to the equations needed. Be aware that these equations are not independent. In many
situations we have two unknowns and need two equations from the set to solve for the unknowns. We need as many
equations as there are unknowns to solve a given situation.
SUMMARY OF KINEMATIC EQUATIONS (CONSTANT A)
Before we get into the examples, let’s look at some of the equations more closely to see the behavior of acceleration
at extreme values. Rearranging Equation 3.12, we have
From this we see that, for a finite time, if the difference between the initial and final velocities is small, the
acceleration is small, approaching zero in the limit that the initial and final velocities are equal. On the contrary, in
the limit for a finite difference between the initial and final velocities, acceleration becomes infinite.
Similarly, rearranging Equation 3.14, we can express acceleration in terms of velocities and displacement:
Thus, for a finite difference between the initial and final velocities acceleration becomes infinite in the limit the
displacement approaches zero. Acceleration approaches zero in the limit the difference in initial and final velocities
approaches zero for a finite displacement.
EXAMPLE 3.10
How Far Does a Car Go?
On dry concrete, a car can accelerate opposite to the motion at a rate of 7.00 m/s2, whereas on wet concrete it can
accelerate opposite to the motion at only 5.00 m/s2. Find the distances necessary to stop a car moving at 30.0 m/s
(about 110 km/h) on (a) dry concrete and (b) wet concrete. (c) Repeat both calculations and find the displacement
from the point where the driver sees a traffic light turn red, taking into account their reaction time of 0.500 s to get
their foot on the brake.
Strategy
First, we need to draw a sketch Figure 3.22. To determine which equations are best to use, we need to list all the
known values and identify exactly what we need to solve for.