# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 766-773
############################################################

754 16 • Waves
wavelength , which is the distance between adjacent identical parts of the wave. The amplitude A of the wave is the maximum
displacement of the wave from the equilibrium position, which is indicated by the dotted line. In this example, the medium moves up and
down, whereas the disturbance of the surface propagates parallel to the surface at a speed v.
The water wave in the figure moves through the medium with a propagation velocity The magnitude of the wave
velocity is the distance the wave travels in a given time, which is one wavelength in the time of one period, and the
wave speed is the magnitude of wave velocity. In equation form, this is
16.1
This fundamental relationship holds for all types of waves. For water waves, v is the speed of a surface wave; for
sound, v is the speed of sound; and for visible light, v is the speed of light.
Transverse and Longitudinal Waves
We have seen that a simple mechanical wave consists of a periodic disturbance that propagates from one place to
another through a medium. In Figure 16.4(a), the wave propagates in the horizontal direction, whereas the medium
is disturbed in the vertical direction. Such a wave is called a transverse wave. In a transverse wave, the wave may
propagate in any direction, but the disturbance of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of propagation. In
contrast, in a longitudinal wave or compressional wave, the disturbance is parallel to the direction of propagation.
Figure 16.4(b) shows an example of a longitudinal wave. The size of the disturbance is its amplitude A and is
completely independent of the speed of propagation v.
FIGURE 16.4 (a) In a transverse wave, the medium oscillates perpendicular to the wave velocity. Here, the spring moves vertically up and
down, while the wave propagates horizontally to the right. (b) In a longitudinal wave, the medium oscillates parallel to the propagation of
the wave. In this case, the spring oscillates back and forth, while the wave propagates to the right.
A simple graphical representation of a section of the spring shown in Figure 16.4(b) is shown in Figure 16.5. Figure
16.5(a) shows the equilibrium position of the spring before any waves move down it. A point on the spring is marked
with a blue dot. Figure 16.5(b) through (g) show snapshots of the spring taken one-quarter of a period apart,
sometime after the end of` the spring is oscillated back and forth in the x-direction at a constant frequency. The
disturbance of the wave is seen as the compressions and the expansions of the spring. Note that the blue dot
oscillates around its equilibrium position a distance A, as the longitudinal wave moves in the positive x-direction
with a constant speed. The distance A is the amplitude of the wave. The y-position of the dot does not change as the
wave moves through the spring. The wavelength of the wave is measured in part (d). The wavelength depends on
the speed of the wave and the frequency of the driving force.
Access for free at openstax.org

16.1 • Traveling Waves 755
FIGURE 16.5 (a) This is a simple, graphical representation of a section of the stretched spring shown in Figure 16.4(b), representing the
spring’s equilibrium position before any waves are induced on the spring. A point on the spring is marked by a blue dot. (b–g) Longitudinal
waves are created by oscillating the end of the spring (not shown) back and forth along the x-axis. The longitudinal wave, with a wavelength
, moves along the spring in the +x-direction with a wave speed v. For convenience, the wavelength is measured in (d). Note that the point
on the spring that was marked with the blue dot moves back and forth a distance A from the equilibrium position, oscillating around the
equilibrium position of the point.
Waves may be transverse, longitudinal, or a combination of the two. Examples of transverse waves are the waves on
stringed instruments or surface waves on water, such as ripples moving on a pond. Sound waves in air and water are
longitudinal. With sound waves, the disturbances are periodic variations in pressure that are transmitted in fluids.
Fluids do not have appreciable shear strength, and for this reason, the sound waves in them are longitudinal waves.
Sound in solids can have both longitudinal and transverse components, such as those in a seismic wave.
Earthquakes generate seismic waves under Earth’s surface with both longitudinal and transverse components
(called compressional or P-waves and shear or S-waves, respectively). The components of seismic waves have
important individual characteristics—they propagate at different speeds, for example. Earthquakes also have
surface waves that are similar to surface waves on water. Ocean waves also have both transverse and longitudinal
components.
EXAMPLE 16.1
Wave on a String
A student takes a 30.00-m-long string and attaches one end to the wall in the physics lab. The student then holds
the free end of the rope, keeping the tension constant in the rope. The student then begins to send waves down the
string by moving the end of the string up and down with a frequency of 2.00 Hz. The maximum displacement of the
end of the string is 20.00 cm. The first wave hits the lab wall 6.00 s after it was created. (a) What is the speed of the
wave? (b) What is the period of the wave? (c) What is the wavelength of the wave?
Strategy
a. The speed of the wave can be derived by dividing the distance traveled by the time.
b. The period of the wave is the inverse of the frequency of the driving force.
c. The wavelength can be found from the speed and the period

756 16 • Waves
Solution
a. The first wave traveled 30.00 m in 6.00 s:
b. The period is equal to the inverse of the frequency:
c. The wavelength is equal to the velocity times the period:
Significance
The frequency of the wave produced by an oscillating driving force is equal to the frequency of the driving force.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.1
When a guitar string is plucked, the guitar string oscillates as a result of waves moving through the string. The
vibrations of the string cause the air molecules to oscillate, forming sound waves. The frequency of the sound waves
is equal to the frequency of the vibrating string. Is the wavelength of the sound wave always equal to the wavelength
of the waves on the string?
EXAMPLE 16.2
Characteristics of a Wave
A transverse mechanical wave propagates in the positive x-direction through a spring (as shown in Figure 16.4(a))
with a constant wave speed, and the medium oscillates between and around an equilibrium position. The
graph in Figure 16.6 shows the height of the spring (y) versus the position (x), where the x-axis points in the
direction of propagation. The figure shows the height of the spring versus the x-position at as a dotted
line and the wave at as a solid line. Assume the wave has not traveled more than 1 wavelength in this
time. (a) Determine the wavelength and amplitude of the wave. (b) Find the propagation velocity of the wave. (c)
Calculate the period and frequency of the wave.
FIGURE 16.6 A transverse wave shown at two instants of time.
Strategy
a. The amplitude and wavelength can be determined from the graph.
b. Since the velocity is constant, the velocity of the wave can be found by dividing the distance traveled by the
Access for free at openstax.org

16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 757
wave by the time it took the wave to travel the distance.
c. The period can be found from and the frequency from
Solution
a. Read the wavelength from the graph, looking at the purple arrow in Figure 16.7. Read the amplitude by
looking at the green arrow. The wavelength is and the amplitude is
FIGURE 16.7 Characteristics of the wave marked on a graph of its displacement.
b. The distance the wave traveled from time to time can be seen in the graph. Consider the
red arrow, which shows the distance the crest has moved in 3 s. The distance is
The velocity is
c. The period is and the frequency is
Significance
Note that the wavelength can be found using any two successive identical points that repeat, having the same height
and slope. You should choose two points that are most convenient. The displacement can also be found using any
convenient point.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.2
The propagation velocity of a transverse or longitudinal mechanical wave may be constant as the wave disturbance
moves through the medium. Consider a transverse mechanical wave: Is the velocity of the medium also constant?
16.2 Mathematics of Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Model a wave, moving with a constant wave velocity, with a mathematical expression
• Calculate the velocity and acceleration of the medium
• Show how the velocity of the medium differs from the wave velocity (propagation velocity)
In the previous section, we described periodic waves by their characteristics of wavelength, period, amplitude, and
wave speed of the wave. Waves can also be described by the motion of the particles of the medium through which
the waves move. The position of particles of the medium can be mathematically modeled as wave functions, which
can be used to find the position, velocity, and acceleration of the particles of the medium of the wave at any time.

758 16 • Waves
Pulses
A pulse can be described as wave consisting of a single disturbance that moves through the medium with a constant
amplitude. The pulse moves as a pattern that maintains its shape as it propagates with a constant wave speed.
Because the wave speed is constant, the distance the pulse moves in a time is equal to (Figure 16.8).
FIGURE 16.8 The pulse at time is centered on with amplitude A. The pulse moves as a pattern with a constant shape, with a
constant maximum value A. The velocity is constant and the pulse moves a distance in a time The distance traveled is
measured with any convenient point on the pulse. In this figure, the crest is used.
Modeling a One-Dimensional Sinusoidal Wave using a Wave Function
Consider a string kept at a constant tension where one end is fixed and the free end is oscillated between
and by a mechanical device at a constant frequency. Figure 16.9 shows snapshots of the wave at
an interval of an eighth of a period, beginning after one period
Access for free at openstax.org

16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 759
FIGURE 16.9 Snapshots of a transverse wave moving through a string under tension, beginning at time and taken at intervals of
Colored dots are used to highlight points on the string. Points that are a wavelength apart in the x-direction are highlighted with the same
color dots.
Notice that each select point on the string (marked by colored dots) oscillates up and down in simple harmonic
motion, between and with a period T. The wave on the string is sinusoidal and is translating in the
positive x-direction as time progresses.
At this point, it is useful to recall from your study of algebra that if f(x) is some function, then is the same
function translated in the positive x-direction by a distance d. The function is the same function translated
in the negative x-direction by a distance d. We want to define a wave function that will give the y-position of each
segment of the string for every position x along the string for every time t.
Looking at the first snapshot in Figure 16.9, the y-position of the string between and can be modeled as
a sine function. This wave propagates down the string one wavelength in one period, as seen in the last snapshot.
The wave therefore moves with a constant wave speed of
Recall that a sine function is a function of the angle , oscillating between and , and repeating every
radians (Figure 16.10). However, the y-position of the medium, or the wave function, oscillates between and
, and repeats every wavelength .

760 16 • Waves
FIGURE 16.10 A sine function oscillates between and every radians.
To construct our model of the wave using a periodic function, consider the ratio of the angle and the position,
Using and multiplying the sine function by the amplitude A, we can now model the y-position of the string
as a function of the position x:
The wave on the string travels in the positive x-direction with a constant velocity v, and moves a distance vt in a time
t. The wave function can now be defined by
It is often convenient to rewrite this wave function in a more compact form. Multiplying through by the ratio
leads to the equation
The value is defined as the wave number. The symbol for the wave number is k and has units of inverse meters,
16.2
Recall from Oscillations that the angular frequency is defined as The second term of the wave function
becomes
The wave function for a simple harmonic wave on a string reduces to
where A is the amplitude, is the wave number, is the angular frequency, the minus sign is for waves
moving in the positive x-direction, and the plus sign is for waves moving in the negative x-direction. The velocity of
the wave is equal to
16.3
Think back to our discussion of a mass on a spring, when the position of the mass was modeled as
The angle is a phase shift, added to allow for the fact that the mass may have initial
Access for free at openstax.org