# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 529-535
############################################################

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 519
particles) to large kinetic energies. These particles are then used for nuclear-collision experiments to produce radioactive
isotopes. A cyclotron is illustrated in Figure 11.20. The particles move between two flat, semi-cylindrical metallic
containersD1andD2,calleddees.Thedeesareenclosedinalargermetalcontainer,andtheapparatusisplacedbetween
thepolesofanelectromagnetthatprovidesauniformmagneticfield.Airisremovedfromthelargecontainersothatthe
particlesneitherloseenergynoraredeflectedbecauseofcollisionswithairmolecules.Thedeesareconnectedtoahigh-
frequencyvoltagesourcethatprovidesanalternatingelectricfieldinthesmallregionbetweenthem.Becausethedeesare
made of metal, their interiors are shielded from the electric field.
Figure 11.20 The inside of a cyclotron. A uniform magnetic field is applied as
circulating protons travel through the dees, gaining energy as they traverse through
the gap between the dees.
SupposeapositivelychargedparticleisinjectedintothegapbetweenthedeeswhenD2isatapositivepotentialrelative
toD1.TheparticleisthenacceleratedacrossthegapandentersD1aftergainingkineticenergyqV,whereVistheaverage
potentialdifferencetheparticleexperiencesbetweenthedees.WhentheparticleisinsideD1,onlytheuniformmagnetic
→
field B of the electromagnet acts on it, so the particle moves in a circle of radius
r = mv (11.32)
qB
with a period of
T =
2πm
.
(11.33)
qB
TheperiodofthealternatingvoltagecourseissetatT,sowhiletheparticleisinsideD1,movingalongitssemicircularorbit
inatimeT/2,thepolarityofthedeesisreversed.Whentheparticlereentersthegap,D1ispositivewithrespecttoD2,and
theparticleisagainacceleratedacrossthegap,therebygainingakineticenergyqV.TheparticlethenentersD2,circulates
inaslightlylargercircle,andemergesfromD2afterspendingatimeT/2inthisdee.Thisprocessrepeatsuntiltheorbitof
theparticlereachestheboundaryofthedees.Atthatpoint,theparticle(actually,abeamofparticles)isextractedfromthe
cyclotron and used for some experimental purpose.
Theoperationofthecyclotrondependsonthefactthat,inauniformmagneticfield,aparticle’sorbitalperiodisindependent
ofitsradiusanditskinetic energy.Consequently,theperiodofthealternating voltage sourceneedonlybesetattheone
valuegivenbyEquation 11.33.Withthatsetting,theelectricfieldacceleratesparticleseverytimetheyarebetweenthe
dees.
If the maximum orbital radius in the cyclotron is R, then from Equation 11.32, the maximum speed of a circulating
particle of massmand chargeqis
qBR (11.34)
v max= m .

520 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
Thus, its kinetic energy when ejected from the cyclotron is
q2B2R2 (11.35)
1 2 mv max 2= 2m .
Themaximumkineticenergyattainablewiththistypeofcyclotronisapproximately30MeV.Abovethisenergy,relativistic
effects become important, which causes the orbital period to increase with the radius. Up to energies of several hundred
MeV,therelativisticeffectscanbecompensatedforbymakingthemagneticfieldgraduallyincreasewiththeradiusofthe
orbit. However, for higher energies, much more elaborate methods must be used to accelerate particles.
Particles are accelerated to very high energies with either linear accelerators or synchrotrons. The linear accelerator
accelerates particles continuously with the electric field of an electromagnetic wave that travels down a long evacuated
tube. The Stanford Linear Accelerator (SLAC) is about 3.3 km long and accelerates electrons and positrons (positively
chargedelectrons)toenergiesof50GeV.Thesynchrotronisconstructedsothatitsbendingmagneticfieldincreaseswith
particle speed in such a way that the particles stay in an orbit of fixed radius. The world’s highest-energy synchrotron is
located at CERN, which is on the Swiss-French border near Geneva. CERN has been of recent interest with the verified
discoveryoftheHiggsBoson(seeParticle Physics and Cosmology (http://cnx.org/content/m58767/latest/) ).
This synchrotron can accelerate beams of approximately 10 13 protons to energies of about 10 3 GeV.
Example 11.10
Accelerating Alpha-Particles in a Cyclotron
Acyclotronusedtoacceleratealpha-particles(m=6.64×10 −27 kg, q=3.2×10 −19 C)hasaradiusof0.50
m and a magnetic field of 1.8 T. (a) What is the period of revolution of the alpha-particles? (b) What is their
maximum kinetic energy?
Strategy
a. The period of revolution is approximately the distance traveled in a circle divided by the speed.
Identifying that the magnetic force applied is the centripetal force, we can derive the period formula.
b. Thekineticenergycanbefoundfromthemaximumspeedofthebeam,correspondingtothemaximum
radius within the cyclotron.
Solution
a. By identifying the mass, charge, and magnetic field in the problem, we can calculate the period:
T = 2πm =
2π⎛
⎝ 6.64×10
−27
kg
⎞
⎠ =7.3×10 −8 s.
qB ⎛ −19 ⎞
3.2×10 C(1.8T)
⎝ ⎠
b. By identifying the charge, magnetic field, radius of path, and the mass, we can calculate the maximum
kinetic energy:
2
1 2 mv max 2= q2 2 B m 2R2 = ⎛ ⎝ 3.2×1 2 0 ( − 6 1 .6 9 5 C × ⎞ ⎠ 1 (1 0 . − 8 2 T 7 ) k 2 g (0 ) .50m)2 =6.2×10−12J=39MeV.
11.6 CheckYourUnderstandingAcyclotronistobedesignedtoaccelerateprotonstokineticenergiesof
20 MeV using a magnetic field of 2.0 T. What is the required radius of the cyclotron?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 521
CHAPTER 11 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
cosmic rays comprised of particles that originate mainly from outside the solar system and reach Earth
cyclotron device used to accelerate charged particles to large kinetic energies
dees largemetalcontainersusedincyclotronsthatservecontainastreamofchargedparticlesastheirspeedisincreased
gauss G, unit of the magnetic field strength; 1G=10−4T
Hall effect creation of voltage across a current-carrying conductor by a magnetic field
helical motion superpositionofcircularmotionwithastraight-linemotionthatisfollowedbyachargedparticlemoving
in a region of magnetic field at an angle to the field
magnetic dipole closed-current loop
magnetic dipole moment termIAof the magnetic dipole, also called µ
magnetic field lines continuous curves that show the direction of a magnetic field; these lines point in the same
direction as a compass points, toward the magnetic south pole of a bar magnet
magnetic force force applied to a charged particle moving through a magnetic field
mass spectrometer device that separates ions according to their charge-to-mass ratios
motor (dc) loopofwireinamagneticfield;whencurrentispassedthroughtheloops,themagneticfieldexertstorqueon
the loops, which rotates a shaft; electrical energy is converted into mechanical work in the process
north magnetic pole currentlywhereacompasspointstonorth,nearthegeographicNorthPole;thisistheeffective
southpoleofabarmagnetbuthasflippedbetweentheeffectivenorthandsouthpolesofabarmagnetmultipletimes
over the age of Earth
right-hand rule-1 usingyourrighthandtodetermine thedirection ofeitherthemagnetic force,velocity ofacharged
particle, or magnetic field
south magnetic pole currently where a compass points to the south, near the geographic South Pole; this is the
effective north pole of a bar magnet but has flipped just like the north magnetic pole
tesla SI unit for magnetic field: 1 T = 1 N/A-m
velocity selector apparatus where the crossed electric and magnetic fields produce equal and opposite forces on a
charged particle moving with a specific velocity; this particle moves through the velocity selector not affected by
either field while particles moving with different velocities are deflected by the apparatus
KEY EQUATIONS
Force on a charge in a magnetic field → → →
F =q v × B
Magnitude of magnetic force F =qvBsinθ
Radius of a particle’s path in a magnetic field r = mv
qB
Period of a particle’s motion in a magnetic field
T =
2πm
qB
Force on a current-carrying wire in a uniform magnetic field → → →
F =I l × B
Magnetic dipole moment → ^
µ =NIAn
Torque on a current loop →τ
=
→
µ ×
→
B

522 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
Energy of a magnetic dipole → →
U =− µ · B
Drift velocity in crossed electric and magnetic fields E
v d=
B
Hall potential IBl
V =
neA
Hall potential in terms of drift velocity V =Blv
d
Charge-to-mass ratio in a mass spectrometer q E
m = BB R
0
Maximum speed of a particle in a cyclotron qBR
v max= m
SUMMARY
11.1Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries
• Magnets have two types of magnetic poles, called the north magnetic pole and the south magnetic pole. North
magnetic poles are those that are attracted toward Earth’s geographic North Pole.
• Like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
• DiscoveriesofhowmagnetsrespondtocurrentsbyOerstedandotherscreatedaframeworkthatledtotheinvention
of modern electronic devices, electric motors, and magnetic imaging technology.
11.2Magnetic Fields and Lines
• Charges moving across a magnetic field experience a force determined by → F =q → v × → B . The force is
perpendicular to the plane formed by → v and → B .
• Thedirectionoftheforceonamovingchargeisgivenbytherighthandrule1(RHR-1):Sweepyourfingersina
velocity,magneticfieldplane.Startbypointingtheminthedirectionofvelocityandsweeptowardsthemagnetic
field. Your thumb points in the direction of the magnetic force for positive charges.
• Magnetic fields can be pictorially represented by magnetic field lines, which have the following properties:
1. The field is tangent to the magnetic field line.
2. Field strength is proportional to the line density.
3. Field lines cannot cross.
4. Field lines form continuous, closed loops.
• Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south—it is not possible to isolate north and south poles.
11.3Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
• A magnetic force can supply centripetal force and cause a charged particle to move in a circular path of radius
mv
r = .
qB
• Theperiodofcircularmotionforachargedparticlemovinginamagneticfieldperpendiculartotheplaneofmotion
is T =
2πm
.
qB
• Helicalmotionresultsifthevelocityofthechargedparticlehasacomponentparalleltothemagneticfieldaswell
as a component perpendicular to the magnetic field.
11.4Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
• An electrical current produces a magnetic field around the wire.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 523
• Thedirectionalityofthemagneticfieldproducedisdeterminedbytherighthandrule-2,whereyourthumbpoints
in the direction of the current and your fingers wrap around the wire in the direction of the magnetic field.
→ → →
• Themagneticforceoncurrent-carryingconductorsisgivenby F =I l × B whereIisthecurrentandlis
the length of a wire in a uniform magnetic fieldB.
11.5Force and Torque on a Current Loop
• The net force on a current-carrying loop of any plane shape in a uniform magnetic field is zero.
• The net torque τ on a current-carrying loop of any shape in a uniform magnetic field is calculated using
τ= → µ × → B where →µ is the magnetic dipole moment and → B is the magnetic field strength.
• Themagneticdipolemoment µ istheproductofthenumberofturnsofwireN,thecurrentintheloopI,andthe
area of the loopAor → µ =NIA ^ n.
11.6The Hall Effect
• Perpendicular electric and magnetic fields exert equal and opposite forces for a specific velocity of entering
E
particles,therebyactingasavelocityselector.Thevelocitythatpassesthroughundeflectediscalculatedby v= .
B
• TheHalleffectcanbeusedtomeasurethesignofthemajorityofchargecarriersformetals.Itcanalsobeusedto
measure a magnetic field.
11.7Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
• Amassspectrometerisadevicethatseparatesionsaccordingtotheircharge-to-massratiosbyfirstsendingthem
through a velocity selector, then a uniform magnetic field.
• Cyclotronsareusedtoacceleratechargedparticlestolargekineticenergiesthroughappliedelectricandmagnetic
fields.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
increasing the magnetic force on the charge? Does
11.2Magnetic Fields and Lines changing the direction of the field necessarily mean a
change in the force on the charge?
1. Discuss the similarities and differences between the
electrical force on a charge and the magnetic force on a
charge. 5. An electron passes through a magnetic field without
beingdeflected.Whatdoyouconcludeaboutthemagnetic
field?
2. (a) Is it possible for the magnetic force on a charge
movinginamagneticfieldtobezero?(b)Isitpossiblefor
theelectricforceonachargemovinginanelectricfieldto 6. If a charged particle moves in a straight line, can you
be zero? (c) Is it possible for the resultant of the electric conclude that there is no magnetic field present?
and magnetic forces on a charge moving simultaneously
through both fields to be zero? 7. How could you determine which pole of an
electromagnet is north and which pole is south?
11.3Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic
11.4Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Field
3. Atagiveninstant,anelectronandaprotonaremoving Conductor
with the same velocity in a constant magnetic field. 8. Describe the error that results from accidently using
Compare the magnetic forces on these particles. Compare yourleftratherthanyourrighthandwhendeterminingthe
their accelerations. direction of a magnetic force.
4. Does increasing the magnitude of a uniform magnetic 9. Considering the magnetic force law, are the velocity
fieldthroughwhichachargeistravelingnecessarilymean

524 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
andmagneticfieldalwaysperpendicular?Aretheforceand difficulty does this cause in the use of a compass?
velocity always perpendicular? What about the force and
magnetic field?
11.6The Hall Effect
10. Why can a nearby magnet distort a cathode ray tube
13. Hall potentials are much larger for poor conductors
television picture?
than for good conductors. Why?
11. A magnetic field exerts a force on the moving
electrons ina current carrying wire. What exerts the force
11.7Applications of Magnetic Forces and
on a wire?
Fields
12. There are regions where the magnetic field of earth 14. Describetheprimaryfunctionoftheelectricfieldand
is almost perpendicular to the surface of Earth. What the magnetic field in a cyclotron.
PROBLEMS
11.2Magnetic Fields and Lines
15. What is the direction of the magnetic force on a
positive charge that moves as shown in each of the six
cases?
16. Repeat previous exercise for a negative charge.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9