# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 410-417
############################################################

398 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
A system of objects that meets these two requirements is said to be a closed system (also called an isolated
system). Thus, the more compact way to express this is shown below.
LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM
The total momentum of a closed system is conserved:
This statement is called the Law of Conservation of Momentum. Along with the conservation of energy, it is one of
the foundations upon which all of physics stands. All our experimental evidence supports this statement: from the
motions of galactic clusters to the quarks that make up the proton and the neutron, and at every scale in between.
In a closed system, the total momentum never changes.
Note that there absolutely can be external forces acting on the system; but for the system’s momentum to remain
constant, these external forces have to cancel, so that the net external force is zero. Billiard balls on a table all have
a weight force acting on them, but the weights are balanced (canceled) by the normal forces, so there is no net
force.
The Meaning of ‘System’
A system (mechanical) is the collection of objects in whose motion (kinematics and dynamics) you are interested. If
you are analyzing the bounce of a ball on the ground, you are probably only interested in the motion of the ball, and
not of Earth; thus, the ball is your system. If you are analyzing a car crash, the two cars together compose your
system (Figure 9.15).
FIGURE 9.15 The two cars together form the system that is to be analyzed. It is important to remember that the contents (the mass) of the
system do not change before, during, or after the objects in the system interact.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Conservation of Momentum
Using conservation of momentum requires four basic steps. The first step is crucial:
Access for free at openstax.org

9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 399
1. Identify a closed system (total mass is constant, no net external force acts on the system).
2. Write down an expression representing the total momentum of the system before the “event” (explosion or
collision).
3. Write down an expression representing the total momentum of the system after the “event.”
4. Set these two expressions equal to each other, and solve this equation for the desired quantity.
EXAMPLE 9.6
Colliding Carts
Two carts in a physics lab roll on a level track, with negligible friction. These carts have small magnets at their ends,
so that when they collide, they stick together (Figure 9.16). The first cart has a mass of 675 grams and is rolling at
0.75 m/s to the right; the second has a mass of 500 grams and is rolling at 1.33 m/s, also to the right. After the
collision, what is the velocity of the two joined carts?
FIGURE 9.16 Two lab carts collide and stick together after the collision.
Strategy
We have a collision. We’re given masses and initial velocities; we’re asked for the final velocity. This all suggests
using conservation of momentum as a method of solution. However, we can only use it if we have a closed system.
So we need to be sure that the system we choose has no net external force on it, and that its mass is not changed by
the collision.
Defining the system to be the two carts meets the requirements for a closed system: The combined mass of the two
carts certainly doesn’t change, and while the carts definitely exert forces on each other, those forces are internal to
the system, so they do not change the momentum of the system as a whole. In the vertical direction, the weights of
the carts are canceled by the normal forces on the carts from the track.
Solution
Conservation of momentum is
Define the direction of their initial velocity vectors to be the +x-direction. The initial momentum is then
The final momentum of the now-linked carts is
Equating:
Substituting the given numbers:

400 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Significance
The principles that apply here to two laboratory carts apply identically to all objects of whatever type or size. Even
for photons, the concepts of momentum and conservation of momentum are still crucially important even at that
scale. (Since they are massless, the momentum of a photon is defined very differently from the momentum of
ordinary objects. You will learn about this when you study quantum physics.)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.3
Suppose the second, smaller cart had been initially moving to the left. What would the sign of the final velocity have
been in this case?
EXAMPLE 9.7
A Bouncing Superball
A superball of mass 0.25 kg is dropped from rest from a height of above the floor. It bounces with no
loss of energy and returns to its initial height (Figure 9.17).
a. What is the superball’s change of momentum during its bounce on the floor?
b. What was Earth’s change of momentum due to the ball colliding with the floor?
c. What was Earth’s change of velocity as a result of this collision?
(This example shows that you have to be careful about defining your system.)
FIGURE 9.17 A superball is dropped to the floor ( ), hits the floor ( ), bounces ( ), and returns to its initial height ( ).
Strategy
Since we are asked only about the ball’s change of momentum, we define our system to be the ball. But this is
Access for free at openstax.org

9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 401
clearly not a closed system; gravity applies a downward force on the ball while it is falling, and the normal force from
the floor applies a force during the bounce. Thus, we cannot use conservation of momentum as a strategy. Instead,
we simply determine the ball’s momentum just before it collides with the floor and just after, and calculate the
difference. We have the ball’s mass, so we need its velocities.
Solution
a. Since this is a one-dimensional problem, we use the scalar form of the equations. Let:
◦ the magnitude of the ball’s momentum at time , the moment it was released; since it was dropped
from rest, this is zero.
◦ the magnitude of the ball’s momentum at time , the instant just before it hits the floor.
◦ the magnitude of the ball’s momentum at time , just after it loses contact with the floor after the
bounce.
The ball’s change of momentum is
Its velocity just before it hits the floor can be determined from either conservation of energy or kinematics. We
use kinematics here; you should re-solve it using conservation of energy and confirm you get the same result.
We want the velocity just before it hits the ground (at time ). We know its initial velocity (at time ),
the height it falls, and its acceleration; we don’t know the fall time. We could calculate that, but instead we use
Thus the ball has a momentum of
We don’t have an easy way to calculate the momentum after the bounce. Instead, we reason from the
symmetry of the situation.
Before the bounce, the ball starts with zero velocity and falls 1.50 m under the influence of gravity, achieving
some amount of momentum just before it hits the ground. On the return trip (after the bounce), it starts with
some amount of momentum, rises the same 1.50 m it fell, and ends with zero velocity. Thus, the motion after
the bounce was the mirror image of the motion before the bounce. From this symmetry, it must be true that
the ball’s momentum after the bounce must be equal and opposite to its momentum before the bounce. (This
is a subtle but crucial argument; make sure you understand it before you go on.)
Therefore,
Thus, the ball’s change of momentum during the bounce is
b. What was Earth’s change of momentum due to the ball colliding with the floor?
Your instinctive response may well have been either “zero; the Earth is just too massive for that tiny ball to
have affected it” or possibly, “more than zero, but utterly negligible.” But no—if we re-define our system to be
the Superball + Earth, then this system is closed (neglecting the gravitational pulls of the Sun, the Moon, and
the other planets in the solar system), and therefore the total change of momentum of this new system must
be zero. Therefore, Earth’s change of momentum is exactly the same magnitude:
c. What was Earth’s change of velocity as a result of this collision?

402 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
This is where your instinctive feeling is probably correct:
This change of Earth’s velocity is utterly negligible.
Significance
It is important to realize that the answer to part (c) is not a velocity; it is a change of velocity, which is a very
different thing. Nevertheless, to give you a feel for just how small that change of velocity is, suppose you were
moving with a velocity of . At this speed, it would take you about 7 million years to travel a
distance equal to the diameter of a hydrogen atom.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.4
Would the ball’s change of momentum have been larger, smaller, or the same, if it had collided with the floor and
stopped (without bouncing)?
EXAMPLE 9.8
Ice Hockey 1
Two hockey pucks of identical mass are on a flat, horizontal ice hockey rink. The red puck is motionless; the blue
puck is moving at 2.5 m/s to the left (Figure 9.18). It collides with the motionless red puck. The pucks have a mass
of 15 g. After the collision, the red puck is moving at 2.5 m/s, to the left. What is the final velocity of the blue puck?
FIGURE 9.18 Two identical hockey pucks colliding. The top diagram shows the pucks the instant before the collision, and the bottom
diagram show the pucks the instant after the collision. The net external force is zero.
Strategy
We’re told that we have two colliding objects, we’re told the masses and initial velocities, and one final velocity;
we’re asked for both final velocities. Conservation of momentum seems like a good strategy. Define the system to be
the two pucks; there’s no friction, so we have a closed system.
Before you look at the solution, what do you think the answer will be?
The blue puck final velocity will be:
• zero
• 2.5 m/s to the left
• 2.5 m/s to the right
• 1.25 m/s to the left
• 1.25 m/s to the right
Access for free at openstax.org

9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 403
• something else
Solution
Define the +x-direction to point to the right. Conservation of momentum then reads
Before the collision, the momentum of the system is entirely and only in the blue puck. Thus,
(Remember that the masses of the pucks are equal.) Substituting numbers:
Significance
Evidently, the two pucks simply exchanged momentum. The blue puck transferred all of its momentum to the red
puck. In fact, this is what happens in similar collision where
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.5
Even if there were some friction on the ice, it is still possible to use conservation of momentum to solve this
problem, but you would need to impose an additional condition on the problem. What is that additional condition?
EXAMPLE 9.9
Landing of Philae
On November 12, 2014, the European Space Agency successfully landed a probe named Philae on Comet 67P/
Churyumov/Gerasimenko (Figure 9.19). During the landing, however, the probe actually landed three times, because
it bounced twice. Let’s calculate how much the comet’s speed changed as a result of the first bounce.
FIGURE 9.19 An artist’s rendering of Philae landing on a comet. (credit: modification of work by “DLR German Aerospace Center”/Flickr)

404 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Let’s define upward to be the +y-direction, perpendicular to the surface of the comet, and to be at the surface
of the comet. Here’s what we know:
• The mass of Comet 67P:
• The acceleration due to the comet’s gravity:
• Philae’s mass:
• Initial touchdown speed:
• Initial upward speed due to first bounce:
• Landing impact time:
Strategy
We’re asked for how much the comet’s speed changed, but we don’t know much about the comet, beyond its mass
and the acceleration its gravity causes. However, we are told that the Philae lander collides with (lands on) the
comet, and bounces off of it. A collision suggests momentum as a strategy for solving this problem.
If we define a system that consists of both Philae and Comet 67/P, then there is no net external force on this system,
and thus the momentum of this system is conserved. (We’ll neglect the gravitational force of the sun.) Thus, if we
calculate the change of momentum of the lander, we automatically have the change of momentum of the comet.
Also, the comet’s change of velocity is directly related to its change of momentum as a result of the lander
“colliding” with it.
Solution
Let be Philae’s momentum at the moment just before touchdown, and be its momentum just after the first
bounce. Then its momentum just before landing was
and just after was
Therefore, the lander’s change of momentum during the first bounce is
Notice how important it is to include the negative sign of the initial momentum.
Now for the comet. Since momentum of the system must be conserved, the comet’s momentum changed by exactly
the negative of this:
Therefore, its change of velocity is
Significance
This is a very small change in velocity, about a thousandth of a billionth of a meter per second. Crucially, however, it
is not zero.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.6
The changes of momentum for Philae and for Comet 67/P were equal (in magnitude). Were the impulses
experienced by Philae and the comet equal? How about the forces? How about the changes of kinetic energies?
Access for free at openstax.org