# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 111-116
############################################################

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 103
CHAPTER 2 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
aberration distortion in an image caused by departures from the small-angle approximation
accommodation use of the ciliary muscles to adjust the shape of the eye lens for focusing on near or far objects
angular magnification ratio of the angle subtended by an object observed with a magnifier to that observed by the
naked eye
apparent depth depth at which an object is perceived to be located with respect to an interface between two media
Cassegrain design arrangementofanobjectiveandeyepiecesuchthatthelight-gatheringconcavemirrorhasaholein
the middle, and light then is incident on an eyepiece lens
charge-coupled device (CCD) semiconductorchipthatconvertsalightimageintotinypixelsthatcanbeconverted
into electronic signals of color and intensity
coma similar to spherical aberration, but arises when the incoming rays are not parallel to the optical axis
compound microscope microscope constructed from two convex lenses, the first serving as the eyepiece and the
second serving as the objective lens
concave mirror spherical mirror with its reflecting surface on the inner side of the sphere; the mirror forms a “cave”
converging (or convex) lens lensinwhichlightraysthatenteritparallelconvergeintoasinglepointontheopposite
side
convex mirror spherical mirror with its reflecting surface on the outer side of the sphere
curved mirror mirror formed by a curved surface, such as spherical, elliptical, or parabolic
diverging (or concave) lens lens that causes light rays to bend away from its optical axis
eyepiece lens or combination of lenses in an optical instrument nearest to the eye of the observer
far point furthest point an eye can see in focus
farsightedness (or hyperopia) visual defect in which near objects appear blurred because their images are focused
behind the retina rather than on the retina; a farsighted person can see far objects clearly but near objects appear
blurred
first focus or object focus objectlocatedatthispointwillresultinanimagecreatedatinfinityontheoppositesideof
a spherical interface between two media
focal length distance along the optical axis from the focal point to the optical element that focuses the light rays
focal plane plane that contains the focal point and is perpendicular to the optical axis
focal point foraconverginglensormirror,thepointatwhichconverginglightrayscross;foradiverginglensormirror,
the point from which diverging light rays appear to originate
image distance distance of the image from the central axis of the optical element that produces the image
linear magnification ratio of image height to object height
magnification ratio of image size to object size
near point closest point an eye can see in focus
nearsightedness (or myopia) visual defect in which far objects appear blurred because their images are focused in
frontoftheretinaratherthanontheretina;anearsightedpersoncanseenearobjectsclearlybutfarobjectsappear
blurred
net magnification (M )ofthecompoundmicroscopeistheproductofthelinearmagnificationoftheobjectiveand
net
the angular magnification of the eyepiece
Newtonian design arrangementofanobjectiveandeyepiecesuchthatthefocusedlightfromtheconcavemirrorwas
reflected to one side of the tube into an eyepiece

104 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
object distance
distance of the object from the central axis of the optical element that produces its image
objective lens nearest to the object being examined.
optical axis axis about which the mirror is rotationally symmetric; you can rotate the mirror about this axis without
changing anything
optical power (P)inverseofthefocallengthofalens,withthefocallengthexpressedinmeters.TheopticalpowerPof
a lens is expressed in units of diopters D; that is, 1D=1/m=1m−1
plane mirror plane (flat) reflecting surface
ray tracing technique that uses geometric constructions to find and characterize the image formed by an optical system
real image image that can be projected onto a screen because the rays physically go through the image
second focus or image focus for a converging interface, the point where a bundle of parallel rays refracting at a
sphericalinterface;foradiverginginterface,thepointatwhichthebackwardcontinuationoftherefractedrayswill
converge between two media will focus
simple magnifier (or magnifying glass) converginglensthatproducesavirtualimageofanobjectthatiswithinthe
focal length of the lens
small-angle approximation approximation that is valid when the size of a spherical mirror is significantly smaller
thanthemirror’sradius;inthisapproximation,sphericalaberrationisnegligibleandthemirrorhasawell-defined
focal point
spherical aberration distortion in the image formed by a spherical mirror when rays are not all focused at the same
point
thin-lens approximation assumption that the lens is very thin compared to the first image distance
vertex point where the mirror’s surface intersects with the optical axis
virtual image imagethatcannotbeprojectedonascreenbecausetheraysdonotphysicallygothroughtheimage,they
only appear to originate from the image
KEY EQUATIONS
Image distance in a plane mirror d o=−d
i
Focal length for a spherical mirror R
f =
2
Mirror equation 1 1 1
+ =
d d f
o i
Magnification of a spherical mirror h d
m= i =− i
h d
o o
Sign convention for mirrors
Focal lengthf +for concave mirror
−for convex mirror
Object distanced +for real object
o
−for virtual object
Image distanced +for real image
i
−for virtual image
Magnificationm +for upright image
−for inverted image
Apparent depth equation
h i =
⎛
⎝
n
n
2⎞
⎠ h o
1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 105
Spherical interface equation n n n −n
1+ 2 = 2 1
d d R
o i
The thin-lens equation 1 1 1
+ =
d d f
o i
The lens maker’s equation 1 f = ⎛ ⎝ n n 2 1 −1 ⎞ ⎠ ⎛ ⎝R 1 1 − R 1 2 ⎞ ⎠
The magnificationmof an object h d
m≡ i =− i
h d
o o
Optical power P= 1
f
Optical power of thin, closely spaced lenses P =P +P +P +⋯
total lens1 lens2 lens3
Angular magnificationMof a simple magnifier θ
M = image
θ
object
Angular magnification of an object a distance
M =
⎛25cm⎞⎛
1+
L−ℓ ⎞
Lfrom the eye for a convex lens of focal length ⎝ L ⎠⎝ f ⎠
fheld a distanceℓfrom the eye
Range of angular magnification for a given 25cm ≤M ≤1+ 25cm
lens for a person with a near point of 25 cm f f
Net magnification of compound microscope d obj⎛f eye +25cm ⎞
M =m obj M eye =− i ⎝ ⎠
net obj eye
f f
SUMMARY
2.1Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
• A plane mirror always forms a virtual image (behind the mirror).
• Theimageandobjectarethesamedistancefromaflatmirror,theimagesizeisthesameastheobjectsize,andthe
image is upright.
2.2Spherical Mirrors
• Spherical mirrors may be concave (converging) or convex (diverging).
• The focal length of a spherical mirror is one-half of its radius of curvature: f =R/2.
• The mirror equation and ray tracing allow you to give a complete description of an image formed by a spherical
mirror.
• Sphericalaberrationoccursforsphericalmirrorsbutnotparabolicmirrors;comaticaberrationoccursforbothtypes
of mirrors.
2.3Images Formed by Refraction
This section explains how a single refracting interface forms images.
• Whenanobjectisobservedthroughaplaneinterface betweentwomedia,thenitappearsatanapparentdistance
h
i
that differs from the actual distance h
o
: h
i
=(n
2
/n
1
)h
o
.
• Animageisformedbytherefractionoflightatasphericalinterfacebetweentwomediaofindicesofrefraction n
1
and n .
2

106 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
• Image distance depends on the radius of curvature of the interface, location of the object, and the indices of
refraction of the media.
2.4Thin Lenses
• Two types of lenses are possible: converging and diverging. A lens that causes light rays to bend toward (away
from) its optical axis is a converging (diverging) lens.
• Foraconverginglens,thefocalpointiswheretheconverginglightrayscross;foradiverginglens,thefocalpoint
is the point from which the diverging light rays appear to originate.
• The distance from the center of a thin lens to its focal point is called the focal lengthf.
• Ray tracing is a geometric technique to determine the paths taken by light rays through thin lenses.
• A real image can be projected onto a screen.
• A virtual image cannot be projected onto a screen.
• Aconverginglensformseitherrealorvirtualimages,dependingontheobjectlocation;adiverginglensformsonly
virtual images.
2.5The Eye
• Image formation by the eye is adequately described by the thin-lens equation.
• The eye produces a real image on the retina by adjusting its focal length in a process called accommodation.
• Nearsightedness,ormyopia,istheinabilitytoseefarobjectsandiscorrectedwithadiverginglenstoreducethe
optical power of the eye.
• Farsightedness,orhyperopia,istheinabilitytoseenearobjectsandiscorrectedwithaconverginglenstoincrease
the optical power of the eye.
• Inmyopiaandhyperopia,thecorrectivelensesproduceimagesatdistancesthatfallbetweentheperson’snearand
far points so that images can be seen clearly.
2.6The Camera
• Cameras use combinations of lenses to create an image for recording.
• Digitalphotographyisbasedoncharge-coupleddevices(CCDs)thatbreakanimageintotiny“pixels”thatcanbe
converted into electronic signals.
2.7The Simple Magnifier
• A simple magnifier is a converging lens and produces a magnified virtual image of an object located within the
focal length of the lens.
• Angularmagnificationaccountsformagnificationofanimagecreatedbyamagnifier.Itisequaltotheratioofthe
angle subtended by the image to that subtended by the object when the object is observed by the unaided eye.
• Angular magnification is greater for magnifying lenses with smaller focal lengths.
• Simple magnifiers can produce as great as tenfold (10× ) magnification.
2.8Microscopes and Telescopes
• Many optical devices contain more than a single lens or mirror. These are analyzed by considering each element
sequentially.Theimageformedbythefirstistheobjectforthesecond,andsoon.Thesameray-tracingandthin-
lens techniques developed in the previous sections apply to each lens element.
• Theoverallmagnificationofamultiple-elementsystemistheproductofthelinearmagnificationsofitsindividual
elements times the angular magnification of the eyepiece. For a two-element system with an objective and an
eyepiece, this is
obj eye
M =m M .
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 107
where m obj is the linear magnification of the objective and M eye is the angular magnification of the eyepiece.
• The microscope is a multiple-element system that contains more than a single lens or mirror. It allows us to see
detailthatwecouldnottoseewiththeunaidedeye.Boththeeyepieceandobjectivecontributetothemagnification.
The magnification of a compound microscope with the image at infinity is
(16cm)(25cm)
M =− .
net obj eye
f f
In this equation, 16 cm is the standardized distance between the image-side focal point of the objective lens and
theobject-sidefocalpointoftheeyepiece,25cmisthenormalnearpointdistance, f obj and f eye arethefocal
distances for the objective lens and the eyepiece, respectively.
• Simple telescopes can be made with two lenses. They are used for viewing objects at large distances.
• The angular magnificationMfor a telescope is given by
obj
f
M =− ,
eye
f
where f obj and f eye are the focal lengths of the objective lens and the eyepiece, respectively.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
9. Underwhat circumstances will animage belocated at
2.1Images Formed by Plane Mirrors the focal point of a spherical lens or mirror?
1. What are the differences between real and virtual
images? How can you tell (by looking) whether an image 10. What is meant by a negative magnification? What is
formed by a single lens or mirror is real or virtual? meantbyamagnificationwhoseabsolutevalueislessthan
one?
2. Can you see a virtual image? Explain your response.
11. Cananimagebelargerthantheobjecteventhoughits
magnification is negative? Explain.
3. Can you photograph a virtual image?
4. Can you project a virtual image onto a screen?
2.3Images Formed by Refraction
5. Isit necessary toproject areal image ontoascreen to 12. Derivetheformulafortheapparentdepthofafishin
see it? a fish tank using Snell’s law.
6. Devise an arrangement of mirrors allowing you to see 13. Use a ruler and a protractor to find the image by
the back of your head. What is the minimum number of refraction in the following cases. Assume an air-glass
mirrors needed for this task? interface.Usearefractiveindexof1forairandof1.5for
glass. (Hint: Use Snell’s law at the interface.)
7. Ifyouwishtoseeyourentirebodyinaflatmirror(from (a)Apointobjectlocatedontheaxisofaconcaveinterface
head to toe), how tall should the mirror be? Does its size located at a point within the focal length from the vertex.
dependuponyourdistanceawayfromthemirror?Provide
(b)Apointobjectlocatedontheaxisofaconcaveinterface
a sketch.
located at a point farther than the focal length from the
vertex.
(c)Apointobjectlocatedontheaxisofaconvexinterface
2.2Spherical Mirrors
located at a point within the focal length from the vertex.
8. At what distance is an image always located: at
(d)Apointobjectlocatedontheaxisofaconvexinterface
d o, d
i
, orf?
located at a point farther than the focal length from the
vertex.