# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 202-209
############################################################

190 4 • Chapter Review
Additional Problems
79 . A Formula One race car is traveling at 89.0 m/s
along a straight track enters a turn on the race
track with radius of curvature of 200.0 m. What
centripetal acceleration must the car have to
stay on the track?
80 . A particle travels in a circular orbit of radius 10
m. Its speed is changing at a rate of at
an instant when its speed is 40.0 m/s. What is
the magnitude of the acceleration of the
particle?
81 . The driver of a car moving at 90.0 km/h presses
down on the brake as the car enters a circular
curve of radius 150.0 m. If the speed of the car
is decreasing at a rate of 9.0 km/h each second,
what is the magnitude of the acceleration of the
car at the instant its speed is 60.0 km/h?
82 . A race car entering the curved part of the track
at the Daytona 500 drops its speed from 85.0
m/s to 80.0 m/s in 2.0 s. If the radius of the
curved part of the track is 316.0 m, calculate the
total acceleration of the race car at the 84 . A proton in a synchrotron is moving in a circle of
beginning and ending of reduction of speed. radius 1 km and increasing its speed by
83 . An elephant is located on Earth’s surface at a
latitude Calculate the centripetal acceleration of (a) What is the proton’s total
the elephant resulting from the rotation of Earth acceleration at t = 5.0 s? (b) At what time does
around its polar axis. Express your answer in terms the expression for the velocity become
of the radius of Earth, and time T for one unphysical?
rotation of Earth. Compare your answer with g for
85 . A propeller blade at rest starts to rotate from t =
0 s to t = 5.0 s with a tangential acceleration of
the tip of the blade at The tip of the
blade is 1.5 m from the axis of rotation. At t =
5.0 s, what is the total acceleration of the tip of
the blade?
86 . A particle is executing circular motion with a
constant angular frequency of If
time t = 0 corresponds to the position of the
particle being located at y = 0 m and x = 5 m, (a)
what is the position of the particle at t = 10 s?
(b) What is its velocity at this time? (c) What is
its acceleration?
87 . A particle’s centripetal acceleration is
at t = 0 s where it is on the x-axis
and moving counterclockwise in the xy plane. It
is executing uniform circular motion about an
axis at a distance of 5.0 m. What is its velocity at
t = 10 s?
88 . A rod 3.0 m in length is rotating at 2.0 rev/s
about an axis at one end. Compare the
Access for free at openstax.org

4 • Chapter Review 191
centripetal accelerations at radii of (a) 1.0 m, (b) 94 . On planet Arcon, the maximum horizontal range
2.0 m, and (c) 3.0 m. of a projectile launched at 10 m/s is 20 m. What
is the acceleration of gravity on this planet?
89 . A particle located initially at
undergoes a displacement of 95 . A mountain biker encounters a jump on a race
What is the final course that sends him into the air at to the
position of the particle? horizontal. If he lands at a horizontal distance of
45.0 m and 20 m below his launch point, what is
90 . The position of a particle is given by
his initial speed?
(a) What are
the particle’s velocity and acceleration as 96 . Which has the greater centripetal acceleration, a
functions of time? (b) What are the initial car with a speed of 15.0 m/s along a circular
conditions to produce the motion? track of radius 100.0 m or a car with a speed of
12.0 m/s along a circular track of radius 75.0 m?
91 . A spaceship is traveling at a constant velocity of
97 . A geosynchronous satellite orbits Earth at a
when its rockets fire, giving it
distance of 42,250.0 km and has a period of 1
an acceleration of
day. What is the centripetal acceleration of the
What is its velocity s after the rockets fire?
satellite?
92 . A crossbow is aimed horizontally at a target 40
98 . Two speedboats are traveling at the same speed
m away. The arrow hits 30 cm below the spot at
relative to the water in opposite directions in a
which it was aimed. What is the initial velocity of
moving river. An observer on the riverbank sees
the arrow?
the boats moving at 4.0 m/s and 5.0 m/s. (a)
93 . A long jumper can jump a distance of 8.0 m What is the speed of the boats relative to the
when he takes off at an angle of with respect river? (b) How fast is the river moving relative to
to the horizontal. Assuming he can jump with the the shore?
same initial speed at all angles, how much
distance does he lose by taking off at
Challenge Problems
99 . World’s Longest Par 3. The tee of the world’s lineman is 1.0 m away?
longest par 3 sits atop South Africa’s Hanglip
Mountain at 400.0 m above the green and can
only be reached by helicopter. The horizontal
distance to the green is 359.0 m. Neglect air
resistance and answer the following questions.
(a) If a golfer launches a shot that is with
respect to the horizontal, what initial velocity
must she give the ball? (b) What is the time to
reach the green?
100 . When a field goal kicker kicks a football as hard as
he can at to the horizontal, the ball just clears
the 3-m-high crossbar of the goalposts 45.7 m
away. (a) What is the maximum speed the kicker can
impart to the football? (b) In addition to clearing the 101 . A truck is traveling east at 80 km/h. At an
crossbar, the football must be high enough in the air intersection 32 km ahead, a car is traveling north
early during its flight to clear the reach of the at 50 km/h. (a) How long after this moment will
onrushing defensive lineman. If the lineman is 4.6 m the vehicles be closest to each other? (b) How
away and has a vertical reach of 2.5 m, can he block far apart will they be at that point?
the 45.7-m field goal attempt? (c) What if the

192 4 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 5
Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.1 The Golden Gate Bridge, one of the greatest works of modern engineering, was the longest suspension bridge in the world in
the year it opened, 1937. It is still among the longest suspension bridges. In designing and building a bridge, what physics must we
consider? What forces act on the bridge? What forces keep the bridge from falling? How do the towers, cables, and ground interact to
maintain stability?
CHAPTER OUTLINE
5.1 Forces
5.2 Newton's First Law
5.3 Newton's Second Law
5.4 Mass and Weight
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
5.6 Common Forces
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
INTRODUCTION When you drive across a bridge, you expect it to remain stable. You also expect to speed up or
slow your car in response to traffic changes. In both cases, you deal with forces. The forces on the bridge are in
equilibrium, so it stays in place. In contrast, the force produced by your car engine causes a change in motion. Isaac
Newton discovered the laws of motion that describe these situations.
Forces affect every moment of your life. Your body is held to Earth by force and held together by the forces of
charged particles. When you open a door, walk down a street, lift your fork, or touch a baby’s face, you are applying
forces. Zooming in deeper, your body’s atoms are held together by electrical forces, and the core of the atom, called
the nucleus, is held together by the strongest force we know—strong nuclear force.

194 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
5.1 Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish between kinematics and dynamics
• Understand the definition of force
• Identify simple free-body diagrams
• Define the SI unit of force, the newton
• Describe force as a vector
The study of motion is called kinematics, but kinematics only describes the way objects move—their velocity and
their acceleration. Dynamics is the study of how forces affect the motion of objects and systems. It considers the
causes of motion of objects and systems of interest, where a system is anything being analyzed. The foundation of
dynamics are the laws of motion stated by Isaac Newton (1642–1727). These laws provide an example of the
breadth and simplicity of principles under which nature functions. They are also universal laws in that they apply to
situations on Earth and in space.
Newton’s laws of motion were just one part of the monumental work that has made him legendary (Figure 5.2). The
development of Newton’s laws marks the transition from the Renaissance to the modern era. Not until the advent of
modern physics was it discovered that Newton’s laws produce a good description of motion only when the objects
are moving at speeds much less than the speed of light and when those objects are larger than the size of most
molecules (about m in diameter). These constraints define the realm of Newtonian mechanics. At the
beginning of the twentieth century, Albert Einstein (1879–1955) developed the theory of relativity and, along with
many other scientists, quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics does not have the constraints present in
Newtonian physics. All of the situations we consider in this chapter, and all those preceding the introduction of
relativity in Relativity (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction), are in the
realm of Newtonian physics.
FIGURE 5.2 Isaac Newton (1642–1727) published his amazing work, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, in 1687. It proposed
scientific laws that still apply today to describe the motion of objects (the laws of motion). Newton also discovered the law of gravity,
invented calculus, and made great contributions to the theories of light and color.
Working Definition of Force
Dynamics is the study of the forces that cause objects and systems to move. To understand this, we need a working
definition of force. An intuitive definition of force—that is, a push or a pull—is a good place to start. We know that a
push or a pull has both magnitude and direction (therefore, it is a vector quantity), so we can define force as the
push or pull on an object with a specific magnitude and direction. Force can be represented by vectors or expressed
Access for free at openstax.org

5.1 • Forces 195
as a multiple of a standard force.
The push or pull on an object can vary considerably in either magnitude or direction. For example, a cannon exerts a
strong force on a cannonball that is launched into the air. In contrast, Earth exerts only a tiny downward pull on a
flea. Our everyday experiences also give us a good idea of how multiple forces add. If two people push in different
directions on a third person, as illustrated in Figure 5.3, we might expect the total force to be in the direction shown.
Since force is a vector, it adds just like other vectors. Forces, like other vectors, are represented by arrows and can
be added using the familiar head-to-tail method or trigonometric methods. These ideas were developed in Vectors.
FIGURE 5.3 (a) An overhead view of two ice skaters pushing on a third skater. Forces are vectors and add like other vectors, so the total
force on the third skater is in the direction shown. (b) A free-body diagram representing the forces acting on the third skater.
Figure 5.3(b) is our first example of a free-body diagram, which is a sketch showing all external forces acting on an
object or system. The object or system is represented by a single isolated point (or free body), and only those forces
acting on it that originate outside of the object or system—that is, external forces—are shown. (These forces are the
only ones shown because only external forces acting on the free body affect its motion. We can ignore any internal
forces within the body.) The forces are represented by vectors extending outward from the free body.
Free-body diagrams are useful in analyzing forces acting on an object or system, and are employed extensively in
the study and application of Newton’s laws of motion. You will see them throughout this text and in all your studies
of physics. The following steps briefly explain how a free-body diagram is created; we examine this strategy in more
detail in Drawing Free-Body Diagrams.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
1. Draw the object under consideration. If you are treating the object as a particle, represent the object as a
point. Place this point at the origin of an xy-coordinate system.
2. Include all forces that act on the object, representing these forces as vectors. However, do not include the net
force on the object or the forces that the object exerts on its environment.
3. Resolve all force vectors into x- and y-components.
4. Draw a separate free-body diagram for each object in the problem.
We illustrate this strategy with two examples of free-body diagrams (Figure 5.4). The terms used in this figure are
explained in more detail later in the chapter.

196 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.4 In these free-body diagrams, is the normal force, is the weight of the object, and is the friction.
The steps given here are sufficient to guide you in this important problem-solving strategy. The final section of this
chapter explains in more detail how to draw free-body diagrams when working with the ideas presented in this
chapter.
Development of the Force Concept
A quantitative definition of force can be based on some standard force, just as distance is measured in units relative
to a standard length. One possibility is to stretch a spring a certain fixed distance (Figure 5.5) and use the force it
exerts to pull itself back to its relaxed shape—called a restoring force—as a standard. The magnitude of all other
forces can be considered as multiples of this standard unit of force. Many other possibilities exist for standard
forces. Some alternative definitions of force will be given later in this chapter.
FIGURE 5.5 The force exerted by a stretched spring can be used as a standard unit of force. (a) This spring has a length x when undistorted.
(b) When stretched a distance , the spring exerts a restoring force which is reproducible. (c) A spring scale is one device that
uses a spring to measure force. The force is exerted on whatever is attached to the hook. Here, this force has a magnitude of six
units of the force standard being employed.
Let’s analyze force more deeply. Suppose a physics student sits at a table, working diligently on his homework
(Figure 5.6). What external forces act on him? Can we determine the origin of these forces?
Access for free at openstax.org