# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 636-641
############################################################

624 13 • Gravitation
The change in energy is . To get the kinetic energy, we subtract the change
in potential energy from Example 13.6, . That gives us
. As stated earlier, the kinetic energy of a circular orbit is
always one-half the magnitude of the potential energy, and the same as the magnitude of the total energy. Our
result confirms this.
The second approach is to use Equation 13.7 to find the orbital speed of the Soyuz, which we did for the ISS in
Example 13.9.
So the kinetic energy of the Soyuz in orbit is
the same as in the previous method. The total energy is just
Significance
The kinetic energy of the Soyuz is nearly eight times the change in its potential energy, or 90% of the total energy
needed for the rendezvous with the ISS. And it is important to remember that this energy represents only the energy
that must be given to the Soyuz. With our present rocket technology, the mass of the propulsion system (the rocket
fuel, its container and combustion system) far exceeds that of the payload, and a tremendous amount of kinetic
energy must be given to that mass. So the actual cost in energy is many times that of the change in energy of the
payload itself.
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the conic sections and how they relate to orbital motion
• Describe how orbital velocity is related to conservation of angular momentum
• Determine the period of an elliptical orbit from its major axis
Using the precise data collected by Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler carefully analyzed the positions in the sky of all
the known planets and the Moon, plotting their positions at regular intervals of time. From this analysis, he
formulated three laws, which we address in this section.
Kepler’s First Law
The prevailing view during the time of Kepler was that all planetary orbits were circular. The data for Mars presented
the greatest challenge to this view and that eventually encouraged Kepler to give up the popular idea. Kepler’s first
law states that every planet moves along an ellipse, with the Sun located at a focus of the ellipse. An ellipse is
defined as the set of all points such that the sum of the distance from each point to two foci is a constant. Figure
13.16 shows an ellipse and describes a simple way to create it.
Access for free at openstax.org

13.5 • Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion 625
FIGURE 13.16 (a) An ellipse is a curve in which the sum of the distances from a point on the curve to two foci is a constant.
From this definition, you can see that an ellipse can be created in the following way. Place a pin at each focus, then place a loop of string
around a pencil and the pins. Keeping the string taught, move the pencil around in a complete circuit. If the two foci occupy the same place,
the result is a circle—a special case of an ellipse. (b) For an elliptical orbit, if , then m follows an elliptical path with M at one focus.
More exactly, both m and M move in their own ellipse about the common center of mass.
For elliptical orbits, the point of closest approach of a planet to the Sun is called the perihelion. It is labeled point A
in Figure 13.16. The farthest point is the aphelion and is labeled point B in the figure. For the Moon’s orbit about
Earth, those points are called the perigee and apogee, respectively.
An ellipse has several mathematical forms, but all are a specific case of the more general equation for conic
sections. There are four different conic sections, all given by the equation
13.10
The variables r and are shown in Figure 13.17 in the case of an ellipse. The constants and e are determined by
the total energy and angular momentum of the satellite at a given point. The constant e is called the eccentricity.
The values of and e determine which of the four conic sections represents the path of the satellite.
FIGURE 13.17 As before, the distance between the planet and the Sun is r, and the angle measured from the x-axis, which is along the
major axis of the ellipse, is .
One of the real triumphs of Newton’s law of universal gravitation, with the force proportional to the inverse of the
distance squared, is that when it is combined with his second law, the solution for the path of any satellite is a conic
section. Every path taken by m is one of the four conic sections: a circle or an ellipse for bound or closed orbits, or a
parabola or hyperbola for unbounded or open orbits. These conic sections are shown in Figure 13.18.

626 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.18 All motion caused by an inverse square force is one of the four conic sections and is determined by the energy and direction
of the moving body.
If the total energy is negative, then , and Equation 13.10 represents a bound or closed orbit of either an
ellipse or a circle, where . [You can see from Equation 13.10 that for , , and hence the radius is
constant.] For ellipses, the eccentricity is related to how oblong the ellipse appears. A circle has zero eccentricity,
whereas a very long, drawn-out ellipse has an eccentricity near one.
If the total energy is exactly zero, then and the path is a parabola. Recall that a satellite with zero total energy
has exactly the escape velocity. (The parabola is formed only by slicing the cone parallel to the tangent line along
the surface.) Finally, if the total energy is positive, then and the path is a hyperbola. These last two paths
represent unbounded orbits, where m passes by M once and only once. This situation has been observed for several
comets that approach the Sun and then travel away, never to return.
We have confined ourselves to the case in which the smaller mass (planet) orbits a much larger, and hence
stationary, mass (Sun), but Equation 13.10 also applies to any two gravitationally interacting masses. Each mass
traces out the exact same-shaped conic section as the other. That shape is determined by the total energy and
angular momentum of the system, with the center of mass of the system located at the focus. The ratio of the
dimensions of the two paths is the inverse of the ratio of their masses.
INTERACTIVE
You can see an animation of two interacting objects at the My Solar System page at Phet (https://openstax.org/l/
21mysolarsys). Choose the Sun and Planet preset option. You can also view the more complicated multiple body
problems as well. You may find the actual path of the Moon quite surprising, yet is obeying Newton’s simple laws of
motion.
Orbital Transfers
People have imagined traveling to the other planets of our solar system since they were discovered. But how can we
best do this? The most efficient method was discovered in 1925 by Walter Hohmann, inspired by a popular science
fiction novel of that time. The method is now called a Hohmann transfer. For the case of traveling between two
circular orbits, the transfer is along a “transfer” ellipse that perfectly intercepts those orbits at the aphelion and
perihelion of the ellipse. Figure 13.19 shows the case for a trip from Earth’s orbit to that of Mars. As before, the Sun
is at the focus of the ellipse.
For any ellipse, the semi-major axis is defined as one-half the sum of the perihelion and the aphelion. In Figure
13.17, the semi-major axis is the distance from the origin to either side of the ellipse along the x-axis, or just one-
half the longest axis (called the major axis). Hence, to travel from one circular orbit of radius to another circular
orbit of radius , the aphelion of the transfer ellipse will be equal to the value of the larger orbit, while the
perihelion will be the smaller orbit. The semi-major axis, denoted a, is therefore given by .
Access for free at openstax.org

13.5 • Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion 627
FIGURE 13.19 The transfer ellipse has its perihelion at Earth’s orbit and aphelion at Mars’ orbit.
Let’s take the case of traveling from Earth to Mars. For the moment, we ignore the planets and assume we are alone
in Earth’s orbit and wish to move to Mars’ orbit. From Equation 13.9, the expression for total energy, we can see that
the total energy for a spacecraft in the larger orbit (Mars) is greater (less negative) than that for the smaller orbit
(Earth). To move onto the transfer ellipse from Earth’s orbit, we will need to increase our kinetic energy, that is, we
need a velocity boost. The most efficient method is a very quick acceleration along the circular orbital path, which is
also along the path of the ellipse at that point. (In fact, the acceleration should be instantaneous, such that the
circular and elliptical orbits are congruent during the acceleration. In practice, the finite acceleration is short enough
that the difference is not a significant consideration.) Once you have arrived at Mars orbit, you will need another
velocity boost to move into that orbit, or you will stay on the elliptical orbit and simply fall back to perihelion where
you started. For the return trip, you simply reverse the process with a retro-boost at each transfer point.
To make the move onto the transfer ellipse and then off again, we need to know each circular orbit velocity and the
transfer orbit velocities at perihelion and aphelion. The velocity boost required is simply the difference between the
circular orbit velocity and the elliptical orbit velocity at each point. We can find the circular orbital velocities from
Equation 13.7. To determine the velocities for the ellipse, we state without proof (as it is beyond the scope of this
course) that total energy for an elliptical orbit is
where is the mass of the Sun and a is the semi-major axis. Remarkably, this is the same as Equation 13.9 for
circular orbits, but with the value of the semi-major axis replacing the orbital radius. Since we know the potential
energy from Equation 13.4, we can find the kinetic energy and hence the velocity needed for each point on the
ellipse. We leave it as a challenge problem to find those transfer velocities for an Earth-to-Mars trip.
We end this discussion by pointing out a few important details. First, we have not accounted for the gravitational
potential energy due to Earth and Mars, or the mechanics of landing on Mars. In practice, that must be part of the
calculations. Second, timing is everything. You do not want to arrive at the orbit of Mars to find out it isn’t there. We
must leave Earth at precisely the correct time such that Mars will be at the aphelion of our transfer ellipse just as we
arrive. That opportunity comes about every 2 years. And returning requires correct timing as well. The total trip
would take just under 3 years! There are other options that provide for a faster transit, including a gravity assist flyby
of Venus. But these other options come with an additional cost in energy and danger to the astronauts.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/21plantripmars) for more details about planning a trip to Mars.

628 13 • Gravitation
Kepler’s Second Law
Kepler’s second law states that a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times, that is, the area divided by time,
called the areal velocity, is constant. Consider Figure 13.20. The time it takes a planet to move from position A to B,
sweeping out area , is exactly the time taken to move from position C to D, sweeping area , and to move from
E to F, sweeping out area . These areas are the same: .
FIGURE 13.20 The shaded regions shown have equal areas and represent the same time interval.
Comparing the areas in the figure and the distance traveled along the ellipse in each case, we can see that in order
for the areas to be equal, the planet must speed up as it gets closer to the Sun and slow down as it moves away. This
behavior is completely consistent with our conservation equation, Equation 13.5. But we will show that Kepler’s
second law is actually a consequence of the conservation of angular momentum, which holds for any system with
only radial forces.
Recall the definition of angular momentum from Angular Momentum, . For the case of orbiting motion,
is the angular momentum of the planet about the Sun, is the position vector of the planet measured from the Sun,
and is the instantaneous linear momentum at any point in the orbit. Since the planet moves along the
ellipse, is always tangent to the ellipse.
We can resolve the linear momentum into two components: a radial component along the line to the Sun, and a
component perpendicular to . The cross product for angular momentum can then be written as
.
The first term on the right is zero because is parallel to , and in the second term is perpendicular to , so
the magnitude of the cross product reduces to . Note that the angular momentum does not
depend upon . Since the gravitational force is only in the radial direction, it can change only and not ;
hence, the angular momentum must remain constant.
Now consider Figure 13.21. A small triangular area is swept out in time . The velocity is along the path and it
makes an angle with the radial direction. Hence, the perpendicular velocity is given by . The planet
moves a distance projected along the direction perpendicular to r. Since the area of a triangle is one-
half the base (r) times the height , for a small displacement, the area is given by . Substituting for
, multiplying by m in the numerator and denominator, and rearranging, we obtain
Access for free at openstax.org