# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 568-574
############################################################

556 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
simplified the notation by dropping the subscript z, but we understand here that the summation is over all
contributions along the z-axis, which is the axis of rotation. In Equation 12.9, the z-component of torque from the
force is
12.10
where is the length of the lever arm of the force and is the magnitude of the force (as you saw in Fixed-Axis
Rotation). The angle is the angle between vectors and measuring from vector to vector in the
counterclockwise direction (Figure 12.2). When using Equation 12.10, we often compute the magnitude of torque
and assign its sense as either positive or negative depending on the direction of rotation caused by this
torque alone. In Equation 12.9, net torque is the sum of terms, with each term computed from Equation 12.10, and
each term must have the correct sense. Similarly, in Equation 12.7, we assign the sign to force components in the
x-direction and the sign to components in the x-direction. The same rule must be consistently followed in
Equation 12.8, when computing force components along the y-axis.
FIGURE 12.2 Torque of a force: (a) When the torque of a force causes counterclockwise rotation about the axis of rotation, we say that its
sense is positive, which means the torque vector is parallel to the axis of rotation. (b) When torque of a force causes clockwise rotation
about the axis, we say that its sense is negative, which means the torque vector is antiparallel to the axis of rotation.
INTERACTIVE
View this demonstration (https://openstax.org/l/21rigsquare) to see two forces act on a rigid square in two
dimensions. At all times, the static equilibrium conditions given by Equation 12.7 through Equation 12.9 are
satisfied. You can vary magnitudes of the forces and their lever arms and observe the effect these changes have on
the square.
In many equilibrium situations, one of the forces acting on the body is its weight. In free-body diagrams, the weight
vector is attached to the center of gravity of the body. For all practical purposes, the center of gravity is identical to
the center of mass, as you learned in Linear Momentum and Collisions on linear momentum and collisions. Only in
situations where a body has a large spatial extension so that the gravitational field is nonuniform throughout its
volume, are the center of gravity and the center of mass located at different points. In practical situations, however,
even objects as large as buildings or cruise ships are located in a uniform gravitational field on Earth’s surface,
where the acceleration due to gravity has a constant magnitude of In these situations, the center of
gravity is identical to the center of mass. Therefore, throughout this chapter, we use the center of mass (CM) as the
point where the weight vector is attached. Recall that the CM has a special physical meaning: When an external
force is applied to a body at exactly its CM, the body as a whole undergoes translational motion and such a force
does not cause rotation.
When the CM is located off the axis of rotation, a net gravitational torque occurs on an object. Gravitational torque
is the torque caused by weight. This gravitational torque may rotate the object if there is no support present to
Access for free at openstax.org

12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 557
balance it. The magnitude of the gravitational torque depends on how far away from the pivot the CM is located. For
example, in the case of a tipping truck (Figure 12.3), the pivot is located on the line where the tires make contact
with the road’s surface. If the CM is located high above the road’s surface, the gravitational torque may be large
enough to turn the truck over. Passenger cars with a low-lying CM, close to the pavement, are more resistant to
tipping over than are trucks.
FIGURE 12.3 The distribution of mass affects the position of the center of mass (CM), where the weight vector is attached. If the center
of gravity is within the area of support, the truck returns to its initial position after tipping [see the left panel in (b)]. But if the center of
gravity lies outside the area of support, the truck turns over [see the right panel in (b)]. Both vehicles in (b) are out of equilibrium. Notice
that the car in (a) is in equilibrium: The low location of its center of gravity makes it hard to tip over.
INTERACTIVE
If you tilt a box so that one edge remains in contact with the table beneath it, then one edge of the base of support
becomes a pivot. As long as the center of gravity of the box remains over the base of support, gravitational torque
rotates the box back toward its original position of stable equilibrium. When the center of gravity moves outside of
the base of support, gravitational torque rotates the box in the opposite direction, and the box rolls over. View this
demonstration (https://openstax.org/l/21unstable) to experiment with stable and unstable positions of a box.
EXAMPLE 12.1
Center of Gravity of a Car
A passenger car with a 2.5-m wheelbase has 52% of its weight on the front wheels on level ground, as illustrated in
Figure 12.4. Where is the CM of this car located with respect to the rear axle?

558 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.4 The weight distribution between the axles of a car. Where is the center of gravity located? (credit "car": modification of work
by Jane Whitney)
Strategy
We do not know the weight w of the car. All we know is that when the car rests on a level surface, 0.52w pushes
down on the surface at contact points of the front wheels and 0.48w pushes down on the surface at contact points
of the rear wheels. Also, the contact points are separated from each other by the distance At these
contact points, the car experiences normal reaction forces with magnitudes and on the
front and rear axles, respectively. We also know that the car is an example of a rigid body in equilibrium whose
entire weight w acts at its CM. The CM is located somewhere between the points where the normal reaction forces
act, somewhere at a distance x from the point where acts. Our task is to find x. Thus, we identify three forces
acting on the body (the car), and we can draw a free-body diagram for the extended rigid body, as shown in Figure
12.5.
FIGURE 12.5 The free-body diagram for the car clearly indicates force vectors acting on the car and distances to the center of mass (CM).
When CM is selected as the pivot point, these distances are lever arms of normal reaction forces. Notice that vector magnitudes and lever
arms do not need to be drawn to scale, but all quantities of relevance must be clearly labeled.
We are almost ready to write down equilibrium conditions Equation 12.7 through Equation 12.9 for the car, but first
we must decide on the reference frame. Suppose we choose the x-axis along the length of the car, the y-axis
vertical, and the z-axis perpendicular to this xy-plane. With this choice we only need to write Equation 12.7 and
Equation 12.9 because all the y-components are identically zero. Now we need to decide on the location of the pivot
point. We can choose any point as the location of the axis of rotation (z-axis). Suppose we place the axis of rotation
at CM, as indicated in the free-body diagram for the car. At this point, we are ready to write the equilibrium
conditions for the car.
Solution
Each equilibrium condition contains only three terms because there are forces acting on the car. The first
equilibrium condition, Equation 12.7, reads
12.11
This condition is trivially satisfied because when we substitute the data, Equation 12.11 becomes
The second equilibrium condition, Equation 12.9, reads
12.12
Access for free at openstax.org

12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 559
where is the torque of force is the gravitational torque of force w, and is the torque of force When
the pivot is located at CM, the gravitational torque is identically zero because the lever arm of the weight with
respect to an axis that passes through CM is zero. The lines of action of both normal reaction forces are
perpendicular to their lever arms, so in Equation 12.10, we have for both forces. From the free-body
diagram, we read that torque causes clockwise rotation about the pivot at CM, so its sense is negative; and
torque causes counterclockwise rotation about the pivot at CM, so its sense is positive. With this information, we
write the second equilibrium condition as
12.13
With the help of the free-body diagram, we identify the force magnitudes and and their
corresponding lever arms and We can now write the second equilibrium condition, Equation
12.13, explicitly in terms of the unknown distance x:
12.14
Here the weight w cancels and we can solve the equation for the unknown position x of the CM. The answer is
Solution
Choosing the pivot at the position of the front axle does not change the result. The free-body diagram for this pivot
location is presented in Figure 12.6. For this choice of pivot point, the second equilibrium condition is
12.15
When we substitute the quantities indicated in the diagram, we obtain
12.16
The answer obtained by solving Equation 12.13 is, again,
FIGURE 12.6 The equivalent free-body diagram for the car; the pivot is clearly indicated.
Significance
This example shows that when solving static equilibrium problems, we are free to choose the pivot location. For
different choices of the pivot point we have different sets of equilibrium conditions to solve. However, all choices
lead to the same solution to the problem.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.1
Solve Example 12.1 by choosing the pivot at the location of the rear axle.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.2
Explain which one of the following situations satisfies both equilibrium conditions: (a) a tennis ball that does not
spin as it travels in the air; (b) a pelican that is gliding in the air at a constant velocity at one altitude; or (c) a
crankshaft in the engine of a parked car.

560 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
A special case of static equilibrium occurs when all external forces on an object act at or along the axis of rotation or
when the spatial extension of the object can be disregarded. In such a case, the object can be effectively treated like
a point mass. In this special case, we need not worry about the second equilibrium condition, Equation 12.9,
because all torques are identically zero and the first equilibrium condition (for forces) is the only condition to be
satisfied. The free-body diagram and problem-solving strategy for this special case were outlined in Newton’s Laws
of Motion and Applications of Newton’s Laws. You will see a typical equilibrium situation involving only the first
equilibrium condition in the next example.
INTERACTIVE
View this demonstration (https://openstax.org/l/21pulleyknot) to see three weights that are connected by strings
over pulleys and tied together in a knot. You can experiment with the weights to see how they affect the equilibrium
position of the knot and, at the same time, see the vector-diagram representation of the first equilibrium condition
at work.
EXAMPLE 12.2
A Breaking Tension
A small pan of mass 42.0 g is supported by two strings, as shown in Figure 12.7. The maximum tension that the
string can support is 2.80 N. Mass is added gradually to the pan until one of the strings snaps. Which string is it?
How much mass must be added for this to occur?
FIGURE 12.7 Mass is added gradually to the pan until one of the strings snaps.
Strategy
This mechanical system consisting of strings, masses, and the pan is in static equilibrium. Specifically, the knot that
ties the strings to the pan is in static equilibrium. The knot can be treated as a point; therefore, we need only the first
equilibrium condition. The three forces pulling at the knot are the tension in the 5.0-cm string, the tension in
the 10.0-cm string, and the weight of the pan holding the masses. We adopt a rectangular coordinate system with
the y-axis pointing opposite to the direction of gravity and draw the free-body diagram for the knot (see Figure
12.8). To find the tension components, we must identify the direction angles and that the strings make with
the horizontal direction that is the x-axis. As you can see in Figure 12.7, the strings make two sides of a right
triangle. We can use the Pythagorean theorem to solve this triangle, shown in Figure 12.8, and find the sine and
cosine of the angles and Then we can resolve the tensions into their rectangular components, substitute in
the first condition for equilibrium (Equation 12.7 and Equation 12.8), and solve for the tensions in the strings. The
string with a greater tension will break first.
Access for free at openstax.org

12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 561
FIGURE 12.8 Free-body diagram for the knot in Example 12.2.
Solution
The weight w pulling on the knot is due to the mass M of the pan and mass m added to the pan, or
With the help of the free-body diagram in Figure 12.8, we can set up the equilibrium conditions for the knot:
From the free-body diagram, the magnitudes of components in these equations are
We substitute these components into the equilibrium conditions and simplify. We then obtain two equilibrium
equations for the tensions:
The equilibrium equation for the x-direction tells us that the tension in the 5.0-cm string is twice the tension
in the 10.0-cm string. Therefore, the shorter string will snap. When we use the first equation to eliminate from
the second equation, we obtain the relation between the mass on the pan and the tension in the shorter string:
The string breaks when the tension reaches the critical value of The preceding equation can be solved
for the critical mass m that breaks the string: