# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 123-132
############################################################

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 115
d o=4.0cm fromthelensandthelensisclosetotheeye. 148. In a reflecting telescope the objective is a concave
mirror of radius of curvature 2 m and an eyepiece is a
convexlensoffocallength5cm.Findtheapparentsizeof
143. Let objective and eyepiece of a compound
a25-mtreeatadistanceof10kmthatyouwouldperceive
microscope have focal lengths of 2.5 cm and 10 cm,
when looking through the telescope.
respectively and be separated by 12 cm. A 70-µm object
isplaced6.0cmfromtheobjective.Howlargeisthevirtual
149. Two stars that are 10 9 km apart are viewed by a
image formed by the objective-eyepiece system?
telescope and found to be separated by an angle of
144. Drawraystoscaletolocatetheimageattheretinaif 10 −5 radians.Iftheeyepieceofthetelescopehasafocal
theeyelenshasafocallength2.5cmandthenearpointis length of 1.5 cm and the objective has a focal length of 3
24 cm. (Hint: Place an object at the near point.) meters, how far away are the stars from the observer?
145. Theobjectiveandtheeyepieceofamicroscopehave 150. WhatistheangularsizeoftheMoonifviewedfrom
thefocallengths3cmand10cmrespectively.Decideabout abinocularthathasafocallengthof1.2cmfortheeyepiece
the distance between the objective and the eyepiece if we andafocallengthof8cmfortheobjective?Usetheradius
need a 10× magnification from the objective/eyepiece of the moon 1.74×10 6 m and the distance of the moon
compound system.
from the observer to be 3.8×10 8 m.
146. Afar-sightedpersonhasanearpointof100cm.How
farinfrontorbehindtheretinadoestheimageofanobject 151. An unknown planet at a distance of 1012m from
placed25cmfromtheeyeform?Usethecorneatoretina Earth is observed bya telescope that has a focal length of
distance of 2.5 cm. the eyepiece of 1 cm and a focal length of the objective
of 1 m. If the far away planet is seen to subtend an angle
147. A near-sighted person has afar point of 80 cm. (a) of 10 −5 radian at the eyepiece, what is the size of the
Whatkindofcorrectivelensthepersonwillneedifthelens planet?
is to be placed 1.5 cm from the eye? (b) What would be
the power of the contact lens needed? Assume distance to
contact lens from the eye to be zero.

116 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 3 | Interference 117
3 | INTERFERENCE
Figure 3.1 Soap bubbles are blown from clear fluid into very thin films. The colors we see are not due to any pigmentation but
are the result of light interference, which enhances specific wavelengths for a given thickness of the film.
Chapter Outline
3.1Young's Double-Slit Interference
3.2Mathematics of Interference
3.3Multiple-Slit Interference
3.4Interference in Thin Films
3.5The Michelson Interferometer
Introduction
Themostcertainindicationofawaveisinterference.Thiswavecharacteristicismostprominentwhenthewaveinteracts
withanobjectthatisnotlargecomparedwiththewavelength.Interferenceisobservedforwaterwaves,soundwaves,light
waves, and, in fact, all types of waves.
Ifyouhaveeverlookedatthereds,blues,andgreensinasunlitsoapbubbleandwonderedhowstraw-coloredsoapywater
couldproducethem,youhavehitupononeofthemanyphenomenathatcanonlybeexplainedbythewavecharacteroflight
(seeFigure 3.1).ThesameistrueforthecolorsseeninanoilslickorinthelightreflectedfromaDVDdisc.Theseand
otherinterestingphenomenacannotbeexplainedfullybygeometricoptics.Inthesecases,lightinteractswithobjectsand
exhibitswavecharacteristics.Thebranchofopticsthatconsidersthebehavioroflightwhenitexhibitswavecharacteristics
is calledwave optics(sometimes called physical optics). It is the topic of this chapter.
3.1 | Young's Double-Slit Interference
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the phenomenon of interference
• Define constructive and destructive interference for a double slit
The Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) thought that light was a wave, but Isaac Newton did not. Newton
thoughtthattherewereotherexplanationsforcolor,andfortheinterferenceanddiffractioneffectsthatwereobservableat
thetime.OwingtoNewton’stremendousreputation,hisviewgenerallyprevailed;thefactthatHuygens’sprincipleworked
wasnotconsidereddirectevidenceprovingthatlightisawave.Theacceptanceofthewavecharacteroflightcamemany
yearslaterin1801,whentheEnglishphysicistandphysicianThomasYoung(1773–1829)demonstratedopticalinterference
with his now-classic double-slit experiment.
If there were not one but two sources of waves, the waves could be made to interfere, as in the case of waves on

118 Chapter 3 | Interference
water (Figure 3.2). If light is an electromagnetic wave, it must therefore exhibit interference effects under appropriate
circumstances.InYoung’sexperiment,sunlightwaspassedthroughapinholeonaboard.Theemergingbeamfellontwo
pinholesonasecondboard.Thelightemanatingfromthetwopinholesthenfellonascreenwhereapatternofbrightand
dark spots was observed. This pattern, called fringes, can only be explained through interference, a wave phenomenon.
Figure 3.2 Photograph of an interference pattern produced by
circular water waves in a ripple tank. Two thin plungers are
vibrated up and down in phase at the surface of the water.
Circular water waves are produced by and emanate from each
plunger. The points where the water is calm (corresponding to
destructive interference) are clearly visible.
We can analyze double-slit interference with the help of Figure 3.3, which depicts an apparatus analogous to Young’s.
Lightfromamonochromaticsourcefallsonaslit S .Thelightemanatingfrom S isincidentontwootherslits S and
0 0 1
S thatareequidistantfrom S .Apatternofinterferencefringesonthescreenisthenproducedbythelightemanating
2 0
from S and S .AllslitsareassumedtobesonarrowthattheycanbeconsideredsecondarypointsourcesforHuygens’
1 2
wavelets (The Nature of Light). Slits S and S are a distance d apart (d ≤1mm), and the distance between the
1 2
screen and the slits is D(≈1m), which is much greater thand.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 3 | Interference 119
Figure 3.3 The double-slit interference experiment using monochromatic light and narrow slits.
Fringes produced by interfering Huygens wavelets from slits S and S are observed on the screen.
1 2
Since S isassumedtobeapointsourceofmonochromaticlight,thesecondaryHuygenswaveletsleaving S and S
0 1 2
always maintain a constant phase difference (zero in this case because S and S are equidistant from S ) and have
1 2 0
thesamefrequency.Thesources S and S arethensaidtobecoherent.Bycoherentwaves,wemeanthewavesarein
1 2
phaseorhaveadefinitephaserelationship.Thetermincoherentmeansthewaveshaverandomphaserelationships,which
wouldbethecaseif S and S wereilluminatedbytwoindependentlightsources,ratherthanasinglesource S .Two
1 2 0
independent light sources (which may be two separate areas within the same lamp or the Sun) would generally not emit
theirlightinunison,thatis,notcoherently.Also,because S and S arethesamedistancefrom S ,theamplitudesof
1 2 0
the two Huygens wavelets are equal.
Youngusedsunlight,whereeachwavelengthformsitsownpattern,makingtheeffectmoredifficulttosee.Inthefollowing
discussion,weillustratethedouble-slitexperimentwithmonochromaticlight(single λ)toclarifytheeffect.Figure3.4
shows the pure constructive and destructive interference of two waves having the same wavelength and amplitude.
Figure 3.4 The amplitudes of waves add. (a) Pure constructive interference is obtained when identical waves are in phase. (b)
Pure destructive interference occurs when identical waves are exactly out of phase, or shifted by half a wavelength.

120 Chapter 3 | Interference
When light passes through narrow slits, the slits act as sources of coherent waves and light spreads out as semicircular
waves, as shown in Figure 3.5(a). Pure constructive interference occurs where the waves are crest to crest or trough to
trough.Puredestructiveinterferenceoccurswheretheyarecresttotrough.Thelightmustfallonascreenandbescattered
intooureyesforustoseethepattern.AnanalogouspatternforwaterwavesisshowninFigure3.2.Notethatregionsof
constructiveanddestructiveinterferencemoveoutfromtheslitsatwell-definedanglestotheoriginalbeam.Theseangles
depend on wavelength and the distance between the slits, as we shall see below.
Figure 3.5 Double slits produce two coherent sources of waves that interfere. (a) Light
spreads out (diffracts) from each slit, because the slits are narrow. These waves overlap and
interfere constructively (bright lines) and destructively (dark regions). We can only see this
if the light falls onto a screen and is scattered into our eyes. (b) When light that has passed
through double slits falls on a screen, we see a pattern such as this.
Tounderstandthedouble-slitinterferencepattern,considerhowtwowavestravelfromtheslitstothescreen(Figure3.6).
Eachslitisadifferentdistancefromagivenpointonthescreen.Thus,differentnumbersofwavelengthsfitintoeachpath.
Wavesstartoutfromtheslitsinphase(cresttocrest),buttheymayendupoutofphase(cresttotrough)atthescreenif
thepathsdifferinlengthbyhalfawavelength,interferingdestructively.Ifthepathsdifferbyawholewavelength,thenthe
wavesarriveinphase(cresttocrest)atthescreen,interferingconstructively.Moregenerally,ifthepathlengthdifference
Δl betweenthetwowavesisanyhalf-integralnumberofwavelengths[(1/2)λ,(3/2)λ,(5/2)λ,etc.],thendestructive
interferenceoccurs.Similarly,ifthepathlengthdifferenceisanyintegralnumberofwavelengths(λ,2λ,3λ,etc.),then
constructive interference occurs. These conditions can be expressed as equations:
Δl=mλ, form=0, ±1, ±2, ±3 … (constructive interference) (3.1)
Δl=(m+ 1 )λ, form=0, ±1, ±2, ±3 … (destructive interference) (3.2)
2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 3 | Interference 121
Figure 3.6 Waves follow different paths from the slits to a
common pointPon a screen. Destructive interference occurs
where one path is a half wavelength longer than the other—the
waves start in phase but arrive out of phase. Constructive
interference occurs where one path is a whole wavelength longer
than the other—the waves start out and arrive in phase.
3.2 | Mathematics of Interference
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the angles for bright and dark fringes for double slit interference
• Calculate the positions of bright fringes on a screen
Figure3.7(a)showshowtodeterminethepathlengthdifference Δl forwavestravelingfromtwoslitstoacommonpoint
onascreen.Ifthescreenisalargedistanceawaycomparedwiththedistancebetweentheslits,thentheangle θ between
thepathandalinefromtheslitstothescreen[part(b)]isnearlythesameforeachpath.Inotherwords, r and r are
1 2
essentially parallel. The lengths of r and r differ by Δl, as indicated by the two dashed lines in the figure. Simple
1 2
trigonometry shows
Δl=dsinθ (3.3)
wheredisthedistancebetweentheslits.CombiningthisresultwithEquation3.1,weobtainconstructiveinterferencefor
a double slit when the path length difference is an integral multiple of the wavelength, or
dsinθ=mλ, form=0, ±1, ±2, ±3,…(constructive interference). (3.4)
Similarly,toobtaindestructiveinterferenceforadoubleslit,thepathlengthdifferencemustbeahalf-integralmultipleof
the wavelength, or
dsinθ=(m+ 1 )λ, form=0, ±1, ±2, ±3,…(destructive interference) (3.5)
2
where λ isthewavelengthofthelight,disthedistancebetweenslits,and θ istheanglefromtheoriginaldirectionofthe
beam as discussed above. We callmtheorderof the interference. For example, m=4 is fourth-order interference.

122 Chapter 3 | Interference
Figure 3.7 (a) To reachP, the light waves from S and S must travel different distances. (b) The path difference
1 2
between the two rays is Δl.
Theequationsfordouble-slitinterferenceimplythataseriesofbrightanddarklinesareformed.Forverticalslits,thelight
spreads out horizontally on either side of the incident beam into a pattern called interference fringes (Figure 3.8). The
closer the slits are, the more the bright fringes spread apart. We can see this by examining the equation
dsinθ=mλ, form=0, ±1, ±2, ±3….Forfixed λ andm,thesmallerdis,thelarger θ mustbe,since sinθ=mλ/d.
Thisisconsistentwithourcontentionthatwaveeffectsaremostnoticeablewhentheobjectthewaveencounters(here,slits
a distancedapart) is small. Smalldgives large θ, hence, a large effect.
Referringbacktopart(a)ofthefigure, θ istypicallysmallenoughthat sinθ≈tanθ≈y m/D,where y
m
isthedistance
fromthecentralmaximumtothemthbrightfringeandDisthedistancebetweentheslitandthescreen.Equation3.4may
then be written as
y
d m =mλ
D
or
mλD (3.6)
y m=
d
.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 3 | Interference 123
Figure 3.8 The interference pattern for a double slit has an intensity that falls off with angle. The image shows
multiple bright and dark lines, or fringes, formed by light passing through a double slit.
Example 3.1
Finding a Wavelength from an Interference Pattern
SupposeyoupasslightfromaHe-Nelaserthroughtwoslitsseparatedby0.0100mmandfindthatthethirdbright
line on a screen is formed at an angle of 10.95° relative to the incident beam. What is the wavelength of the
light?
Strategy
The phenomenon is two-slit interference as illustrated in Figure 3.8 and the third bright line is due to third-
orderconstructiveinterference,whichmeansthat m=3.Wearegiven d =0.0100mm and θ=10.95°.The
wavelength can thus be found using the equation dsinθ=mλ for constructive interference.
Solution
Solving dsinθ=mλ for the wavelength λ gives
λ=
ds
m
inθ
.
Substituting known values yields
λ= (0.0100mm)(sin10.95°) =6.33×10−4 mm = 633nm.
3
Significance
Tothreedigits,thisisthewavelengthoflightemittedbythecommonHe-Nelaser.Notbycoincidence,thisred
colorissimilartothatemittedbyneonlights.Moreimportant,however,isthefactthatinterferencepatternscan
beusedtomeasurewavelength.Youngdidthisforvisiblewavelengths.Thisanalyticaltechinqueisstillwidely
usedtomeasureelectromagneticspectra.Foragivenorder,theangleforconstructiveinterferenceincreaseswith
λ, so that spectra (measurements of intensity versus wavelength) can be obtained.