# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 213-218
############################################################

5.2 • Newton's First Law 201
Newton’s First Law and Equilibrium
Newton’s first law tells us about the equilibrium of a system, which is the state in which the forces on the system are
balanced. Returning to Forces and the ice skaters in Figure 5.3, we know that the forces and combine to form
a resultant force, or the net external force: To create equilibrium, we require a balancing
force that will produce a net force of zero. This force must be equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to
which means the vector must be Referring to the ice skaters, for which we found to be ,
we can determine the balancing force by simply finding See the free-body diagram in
Figure 5.3(b).
We can give Newton’s first law in vector form:
5.2
This equation says that a net force of zero implies that the velocity of the object is constant. (The word “constant”
can indicate zero velocity.)
Newton’s first law is deceptively simple. If a car is at rest, the only forces acting on the car are weight and the
contact force of the pavement pushing up on the car (Figure 5.9). It is easy to understand that a nonzero net force is
required to change the state of motion of the car. As a car moves with constant velocity, the friction force propels the
car forward and opposes the drag force against it.
FIGURE 5.9 A car is shown (a) parked and (b) moving at constant velocity. How do Newton’s laws apply to the parked car? What does the
knowledge that the car is moving at constant velocity tell us about the net horizontal force on the car?
EXAMPLE 5.1
When Does Newton’s First Law Apply to Your Car?
Newton’s laws can be applied to all physical processes involving force and motion, including something as mundane
as driving a car.
(a) Your car is parked outside your house. Does Newton’s first law apply in this situation? Why or why not?
(b) Your car moves at constant velocity down the street. Does Newton’s first law apply in this situation? Why or why
not?
Strategy
In (a), we are considering the first part of Newton’s first law, dealing with a body at rest; in (b), we look at the second
part of Newton’s first law for a body in motion.
Solution
a. When your car is parked, all forces on the car must be balanced; the vector sum is 0 N. Thus, the net force is
zero, and Newton’s first law applies. The acceleration of the car is zero, and in this case, the velocity is also
zero.
b. When your car is moving at constant velocity down the street, the net force must also be zero according to
Newton’s first law. The car’s frictional force between the road and tires opposes the drag force on the car with
the same magnitude, producing a net force of zero. The body continues in its state of constant velocity until

202 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
the net force becomes nonzero. Realize that a net force of zero means that an object is either at rest or moving
with constant velocity, that is, it is not accelerating. What do you suppose happens when the car accelerates?
We explore this idea in the next section.
Significance
As this example shows, there are two kinds of equilibrium. In (a), the car is at rest; we say it is in static equilibrium.
In (b), the forces on the car are balanced, but the car is moving; we say that it is in dynamic equilibrium. (We
examine this idea in more detail in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity.) Again, it is possible for two (or more) forces to
act on an object yet for the object to move. In addition, a net force of zero cannot produce acceleration.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.2
A skydiver opens their parachute, and shortly thereafter, they are moving at constant velocity. (a) What forces are
acting on them? (b) Which force is bigger?
INTERACTIVE
Engage the simulation below to predict, qualitatively, how an external force will affect the speed and direction of an
object’s motion. Explain the effects with the help of a free-body diagram. Use free-body diagrams to draw position,
velocity, acceleration, and force graphs, and vice versa. Explain how the graphs relate to one another. Given a
scenario or a graph, sketch all four graphs.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21forcemotion)
5.3 Newton's Second Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish between external and internal forces
• Describe Newton's second law of motion
• Explain the dependence of acceleration on net force and mass
Newton’s second law is closely related to his first law. It mathematically gives the cause-and-effect relationship
between force and changes in motion. Newton’s second law is quantitative and is used extensively to calculate what
happens in situations involving a force. Before we can write down Newton’s second law as a simple equation that
gives the exact relationship of force, mass, and acceleration, we need to sharpen some ideas we mentioned earlier.
Force and Acceleration
First, what do we mean by a change in motion? The answer is that a change in motion is equivalent to a change in
velocity. A change in velocity means, by definition, that there is acceleration. Newton’s first law says that a net
external force causes a change in motion; thus, we see that a net external force causes nonzero acceleration.
We defined external force in Forces as force acting on an object or system that originates outside of the object or
system. Let’s consider this concept further. An intuitive notion of external is correct—it is outside the system of
interest. For example, in Figure 5.10(a), the system of interest is the car plus the person within it. The two forces
exerted by the two students are external forces. In contrast, an internal force acts between elements of the system.
Thus, the force the person in the car exerts to hang on to the steering wheel is an internal force between elements of
the system of interest. Only external forces affect the motion of a system, according to Newton’s first law. (The
internal forces cancel each other out, as explained in the next section.) Therefore, we must define the boundaries of
the system before we can determine which forces are external. Sometimes, the system is obvious, whereas at other
times, identifying the boundaries of a system is more subtle. The concept of a system is fundamental to many areas
of physics, as is the correct application of Newton’s laws. This concept is revisited many times in the study of
physics.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.3 • Newton's Second Law 203
FIGURE 5.10 Different forces exerted on the same mass produce different accelerations. (a) Two students push a stalled car. All external
forces acting on the car are shown. (b) The forces acting on the car are transferred to a coordinate plane (free-body diagram) for simpler
analysis. (c) The tow truck can produce greater external force on the same mass, and thus greater acceleration.
From this example, you can see that different forces exerted on the same mass produce different accelerations. In
Figure 5.10(a), the two students push a car with a driver in it. Arrows representing all external forces are shown. The
system of interest is the car and its driver. The weight of the system and the support of the ground are also
shown for completeness and are assumed to cancel (because there was no vertical motion and no imbalance of
forces in the vertical direction to create a change in motion). The vector represents the friction acting on the car,
and it acts to the left, opposing the motion of the car. (We discuss friction in more detail in the next chapter.) In
Figure 5.10(b), all external forces acting on the system add together to produce the net force The free-body
diagram shows all of the forces acting on the system of interest. The dot represents the center of mass of the
system. Each force vector extends from this dot. Because there are two forces acting to the right, the vectors are
shown collinearly. Finally, in Figure 5.10(c), a larger net external force produces a larger acceleration when
the tow truck pulls the car.
It seems reasonable that acceleration would be directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net external
force acting on a system. This assumption has been verified experimentally and is illustrated in Figure 5.10. To
obtain an equation for Newton’s second law, we first write the relationship of acceleration and net external force
as the proportionality

204 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
where the symbol means “proportional to.” (Recall from Forces that the net external force is the vector sum of all
external forces and is sometimes indicated as ) This proportionality shows what we have said in
words—acceleration is directly proportional to net external force. Once the system of interest is chosen, identify the
external forces and ignore the internal ones. It is a tremendous simplification to disregard the numerous internal
forces acting between objects within the system, such as muscular forces within the students’ bodies, let alone the
myriad forces between the atoms in the objects. Still, this simplification helps us solve some complex problems.
It also seems reasonable that acceleration should be inversely proportional to the mass of the system. In other
words, the larger the mass (the inertia), the smaller the acceleration produced by a given force. As illustrated in
Figure 5.11, the same net external force applied to a basketball produces a much smaller acceleration when it is
applied to an SUV. The proportionality is written as
where m is the mass of the system and a is the magnitude of the acceleration. Experiments have shown that
acceleration is exactly inversely proportional to mass, just as it is directly proportional to net external force.
FIGURE 5.11 The same force exerted on systems of different masses produces different accelerations. (a) A basketball player pushes on a
basketball to make a pass. (Ignore the effect of gravity on the ball.) (b) The same player exerts an identical force on a stalled SUV and
produces far less acceleration. (c) The free-body diagrams are identical, permitting direct comparison of the two situations. A series of
patterns for free-body diagrams will emerge as you do more problems and learn how to draw them in Drawing Free-Body Diagrams.
It has been found that the acceleration of an object depends only on the net external force and the mass of the
object. Combining the two proportionalities just given yields Newton’s second law.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
The acceleration of a system is directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net external force acting
on the system and is inversely proportional to its mass. In equation form, Newton’s second law is
where is the acceleration, is the net force, and m is the mass. This is often written in the more familiar
form
Access for free at openstax.org

5.3 • Newton's Second Law 205
5.3
but the first equation gives more insight into what Newton’s second law means. When only the magnitude of
force and acceleration are considered, this equation can be written in the simpler scalar form:
5.4
The law is a cause-and-effect relationship among three quantities that is not simply based on their definitions. The
validity of the second law is based on experimental verification. The free-body diagram, which you will learn to draw
in Drawing Free-Body Diagrams, is the basis for writing Newton’s second law.
EXAMPLE 5.2
What Acceleration Can a Person Produce When Pushing a Lawn Mower?
Suppose that the net external force (push minus friction) exerted on a lawn mower is 51 N (about 11 lb.) parallel to
the ground (Figure 5.12). The mass of the mower is 24 kg. What is its acceleration?
FIGURE 5.12 (a) The net force on a lawn mower is 51 N to the right. At what rate does the lawn mower accelerate to the right? (b) The free-
body diagram for this problem is shown.
Strategy
This problem involves only motion in the horizontal direction; we are also given the net force, indicated by the single
vector, but we can suppress the vector nature and concentrate on applying Newton’s second law. Since and m
are given, the acceleration can be calculated directly from Newton’s second law as
Solution
The magnitude of the acceleration a is . Entering known values gives
Substituting the unit of kilograms times meters per square second for newtons yields
Significance
The direction of the acceleration is the same direction as that of the net force, which is parallel to the ground. This is
a result of the vector relationship expressed in Newton’s second law, that is, the vector representing net force is the
scalar multiple of the acceleration vector. There is no information given in this example about the individual external
forces acting on the system, but we can say something about their relative magnitudes. For example, the force
exerted by the person pushing the mower must be greater than the friction opposing the motion (since we know the
mower moved forward), and the vertical forces must cancel because no acceleration occurs in the vertical direction