# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 148-153
############################################################

136 3 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
acceleration due to gravity acceleration of an object instantaneous acceleration acceleration at a specific
as a result of gravity point in time
average acceleration the rate of change in velocity; instantaneous speed the absolute value of the
the change in velocity over time instantaneous velocity
average speed the total distance traveled divided by instantaneous velocity the velocity at a specific
elapsed time instant or time point
average velocity the displacement divided by the kinematics the description of motion through
time over which displacement occurs under properties such as position, time, velocity, and
constant acceleration acceleration
displacement the change in position of an object position the location of an object at a particular time
distance traveled the total length of the path total displacement the sum of individual
traveled between two positions displacements over a given time period
elapsed time the difference between the ending time two-body pursuit problem a kinematics problem in
and the beginning time which the unknowns are calculated by solving the
free fall the state of movement that results from kinematic equations simultaneously for two moving
gravitational force only objects
Key Equations
Displacement
Total displacement
Average velocity
Instantaneous velocity
Average speed
Instantaneous speed
Average acceleration
Instantaneous acceleration
Position from average velocity
Average velocity (for constant acceleration)
Velocity from acceleration
Position from velocity and acceleration
Velocity from distance
Velocity of free fall
Height of free fall
Velocity of free fall from height
Velocity from acceleration
Position from velocity
Summary
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity limited to motion along a straight line, called
one-dimensional motion.
• Kinematics is the description of motion without
• Displacement is the change in position of an
considering its causes. In this chapter, it is
object. The SI unit for displacement is the meter.
Access for free at openstax.org

3 • Chapter Review 137
Displacement has direction as well as magnitude. • Instantaneous acceleration a(t) is a continuous
• Distance traveled is the total length of the path function of time and gives the acceleration at any
traveled between two positions. specific time during the motion. It is calculated
• Time is measured in terms of change. The time from the derivative of the velocity function.
between two position points and is Instantaneous acceleration is the slope of the
. Elapsed time for an event is velocity-versus-time graph.
, where is the final time and is • Negative acceleration (sometimes called
the initial time. The initial time is often taken to deceleration) is acceleration in the negative
be zero. direction in the chosen coordinate system.
• Average velocity is defined as displacement
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
divided by elapsed time. If and are
two position time points, the average velocity • When analyzing one-dimensional motion with
between these points is constant acceleration, identify the known
quantities and choose the appropriate equations
to solve for the unknowns. Either one or two of
the kinematic equations are needed to solve for
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
the unknowns, depending on the known and
• Instantaneous velocity is a continuous function unknown quantities.
of time and gives the velocity at any point in time • Two-body pursuit problems always require two
during a particle’s motion. We can calculate the equations to be solved simultaneously for the
instantaneous velocity at a specific time by unknowns.
taking the derivative of the position function,
3.5 Free Fall
which gives us the functional form of
instantaneous velocity v(t). • An object in free fall experiences constant
• Instantaneous velocity is a vector and can be acceleration if air resistance is negligible.
negative. • On Earth, all free-falling objects have an
• Instantaneous speed is found by taking the acceleration g due to gravity, which averages
absolute value of instantaneous velocity, and it is .
always positive. • For objects in free fall, the upward direction is
• Average speed is total distance traveled divided normally taken as positive for displacement,
by elapsed time. velocity, and acceleration.
• The slope of a position-versus-time graph at a
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from
specific time gives instantaneous velocity at that
Acceleration
time.
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration • Integral calculus gives us a more complete
formulation of kinematics.
• Acceleration is the rate at which velocity • If acceleration a(t) is known, we can use integral
changes. The SI unit for acceleration is meters calculus to derive expressions for velocity v(t)
per second squared. and position x(t).
• Acceleration is a vector. It has both magnitude • If acceleration is constant, the integral equations
and direction and so can be the rate of change of reduce to Equation 3.12 and Equation 3.13 for
the magnitude or direction of the velocity, or motion with constant acceleration.
both.
Conceptual Questions
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity traveled equal magnitude of displacement?
What is the only case in which magnitude of
1 . Give an example in which there are clear
displacement and distance are exactly the
distinctions among distance traveled,
same?
displacement, and magnitude of displacement.
Identify each quantity in your example 3 . Bacteria move back and forth using their flagella
specifically. (structures that look like little tails). Speeds of
up to 50 μm/s (50 × 10−6 m/s) have been
2 . Under what circumstances does distance
observed. The total distance traveled by a

138 3 • Chapter Review
bacterium is large for its size, whereas its what is the required number of known physical
displacement is small. Why is this? variables that are needed to solve for the
unknown quantities using the kinematic
4 . Give an example of a device used to measure
equations?
time and identify what change in that device
indicates a change in time. 17 . State two scenarios of the kinematics of single
object where three known quantities require two
5 . Does a car’s odometer measure distance
kinematic equations to solve for the unknowns.
traveled or displacement?
3.5 Free Fall
6 . During a given time interval the average velocity
of an object is zero. What can you conclude 18 . What is the acceleration of a rock thrown
about its displacement over the time interval? straight upward on the way up? At the top of its
flight? On the way down? Assume there is no air
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
resistance.
7 . There is a distinction between average speed
19 . An object that is thrown straight up falls back to
and the magnitude of average velocity. Give an
Earth. This is one-dimensional motion. (a) When
example that illustrates the difference between
is its velocity zero? (b) Does its velocity change
these two quantities.
direction? (c) Does the acceleration have the
8 . Does the speedometer of a car measure speed same sign on the way up as on the way down?
or velocity?
20 . Suppose you throw a rock nearly straight up at a
9 . If you divide the total distance traveled on a car coconut in a palm tree and the rock just misses
trip (as determined by the odometer) by the the coconut on the way up but hits the coconut
elapsed time of the trip, are you calculating on the way down. Neglecting air resistance and
average speed or magnitude of average velocity? the slight horizontal variation in motion to
Under what circumstances are these two account for the hit and miss of the coconut, how
quantities the same? does the speed of the rock when it hits the
coconut on the way down compare with what it
10 . How are instantaneous velocity and
would have been if it had hit the coconut on the
instantaneous speed related to one another?
way up? Is it more likely to dislodge the coconut
How do they differ?
on the way up or down? Explain.
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
21 . The severity of a fall depends on your speed
11 . Is it possible for speed to be constant while when you strike the ground. All factors but the
acceleration is not zero? acceleration from gravity being the same, how
many times higher could a safe fall occur on the
12 . Is it possible for velocity to be constant while
Moon than on Earth (gravitational acceleration
acceleration is not zero? Explain.
on the Moon is about one-sixth that of the
13 . Give an example in which velocity is zero yet Earth)?
acceleration is not.
22 . How many times higher could an astronaut jump
14 . If a subway train is moving to the left (has a on the Moon than on Earth if her takeoff speed is
negative velocity) and then comes to a stop, the same in both locations (gravitational
what is the direction of its acceleration? Is the acceleration on the Moon is about on-sixth of
acceleration positive or negative? that on Earth)?
15 . Plus and minus signs are used in one- 3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from
dimensional motion to indicate direction. What Acceleration
is the sign of an acceleration that reduces the
23 . When given the acceleration function, what
magnitude of a negative velocity? Of a positive
additional information is needed to find the
velocity?
velocity function and position function?
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
16 . When analyzing the motion of a single object,
Access for free at openstax.org

3 • Chapter Review 139
Problems
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity following position-versus-time graph.
24 . Consider a coordinate system in which the
positive x axis is directed upward vertically.
What are the positions of a particle (a) 5.0 m
directly above the origin and (b) 2.0 m below the
origin?
25 . A car is 2.0 km west of a traffic light at t = 0 and
5.0 km east of the light at t = 6.0 min. Assume
the origin of the coordinate system is the light
and the positive x direction is eastward. (a) What
are the car’s position vectors at these two
times? (b) What is the car’s displacement
between 0 min and 6.0 min?
26 . The Shanghai maglev train connects Longyang
Road to Pudong International Airport, a distance
of 30 km. The journey takes 8 minutes on
average. What is the maglev train’s average
32 . Sketch the velocity-versus-time graph from the
velocity?
following position-versus-time graph.
27 . The position of a particle moving along the
x-axis is given by m. (a) At
what time does the particle cross the origin? (b)
What is the displacement of the particle
between and
28 . A cyclist rides 8.0 km east for 20 minutes, then
they turn and head west for 8 minutes and 3.2
km. Finally, they ride east for 16 km, which takes
40 minutes. (a) What is the final displacement of
the cyclist? (b) What is their average velocity?
29 . On February 15, 2013, a superbolide meteor
(brighter than the Sun) entered Earth’s
33 . Given the following velocity-versus-time graph,
atmosphere over Chelyabinsk, Russia, and
sketch the position-versus-time graph.
exploded at an altitude of 23.5 km.
Eyewitnesses could feel the intense heat from
the fireball, and the blast wave from the
explosion blew out windows in buildings. The
blast wave took approximately 2 minutes 30
seconds to reach ground level. The blast wave
traveled at 10° above the horizon. (a) What was
the average velocity of the blast wave? b)
Compare this with the speed of sound, which is
343 m/s at sea level.
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
30 . A woodchuck runs 20 m to the right in 5 s, then
turns and runs 10 m to the left in 3 s. (a) What is
34 . An object has a position function x(t) = 5t m. (a)
the average velocity of the woodchuck? (b) What
What is the velocity as a function of time? (b)
is its average speed?
Graph the position function and the velocity
31 . Sketch the velocity-versus-time graph from the function.

140 3 • Chapter Review
35 . A particle moves along the x-axis according to from rest to a suborbital speed of 6.50 km/s in
. (a) What is the 60.0 s (the actual speed and time are classified).
instantaneous velocity at t = 2 s and t = 3 s? (b) What is its average acceleration in meters per
What is the instantaneous speed at these times? second squared and in multiples of g (9.80
(c) What is the average velocity between t = 2 s
m/s2)?
and t = 3 s?
42 . An airplane, starting from rest, moves down the
36 . Unreasonable results. A particle moves along runway at constant acceleration for 18 s and
the x-axis according to ​ . At then takes off at a speed of 60 m/s. What is the
average acceleration of the plane?
what time is the velocity of the particle equal to
zero? Is this reasonable? 3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 43 . A particle moves in a straight line at a constant
velocity of 30 m/s. What is its displacement
37 . A cheetah can accelerate from rest to a speed of
between t = 0 and t = 5.0 s?
30.0 m/s in 7.00 s. What is its acceleration?
44 . A particle moves in a straight line with an initial
38 . Dr. John Paul Stapp was a U.S. Air Force officer
velocity of 0 m/s and a constant acceleration of
who studied the effects of extreme acceleration 30 m/s2. If , what is the particle’s
on the human body. On December 10, 1954,
position at t = 5 s?
Stapp rode a rocket sled, accelerating from rest
to a top speed of 282 m/s (1015 km/h) in 5.00 s 45 . A particle moves in a straight line with an initial
and was brought jarringly back to rest in only velocity of 30 m/s and constant acceleration 30
1.40 s. Calculate his (a) acceleration in his m/s2. (a) What is its displacement at t = 5 s? (b)
direction of motion and (b) acceleration opposite What is its velocity at this same time?
to his direction of motion. Express each in
46 . (a) Sketch a graph of velocity versus time
multiples of g (9.80 m/s2) by taking its ratio to
corresponding to the graph of displacement versus
the acceleration of gravity.
time given in the following figure. (b) Identify the
39 . Sketch the acceleration-versus-time graph from time or times (ta, tb, tc, etc.) at which the
the following velocity-versus-time graph. instantaneous velocity has the greatest positive
value. (c) At which times is it zero? (d) At which
times is it negative?
47 . (a) Sketch a graph of acceleration versus time
corresponding to the graph of velocity versus time
40 . A commuter backs her car out of her garage with given in the following figure. (b) Identify the time or
an acceleration of 1.40 m/s2. (a) How long does times (ta, tb, tc, etc.) at which the acceleration has
it take her to reach a speed of 2.00 m/s? (b) If the greatest positive value. (c) At which times is it
she then brakes to a stop in 0.800 s, what is her zero? (d) At which times is it negative?
acceleration?
41 . Assume an intercontinental ballistic missile goes
Access for free at openstax.org