# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 464-470
############################################################

452 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.1 Rotational Variables
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physical meaning of rotational variables as applied to fixed-axis rotation
• Explain how angular velocity is related to tangential speed
• Calculate the instantaneous angular velocity given the angular position function
• Find the angular velocity and angular acceleration in a rotating system
• Calculate the average angular acceleration when the angular velocity is changing
• Calculate the instantaneous angular acceleration given the angular velocity function
So far in this text, we have mainly studied translational motion, including the variables that describe it:
displacement, velocity, and acceleration. Now we expand our description of motion to rotation—specifically,
rotational motion about a fixed axis. We will find that rotational motion is described by a set of related variables
similar to those we used in translational motion.
Angular Velocity
Uniform circular motion (discussed previously in Motion in Two and Three Dimensions) is motion in a circle at
constant speed. Although this is the simplest case of rotational motion, it is very useful for many situations, and we
use it here to introduce rotational variables.
In Figure 10.2, we show a particle moving in a circle. The coordinate system is fixed and serves as a frame of
reference to define the particle’s position. Its position vector from the origin of the circle to the particle sweeps out
the angle , which increases in the counterclockwise direction as the particle moves along its circular path. The
angle is called the angular position of the particle. As the particle moves in its circular path, it also traces an arc
length s. The particle may complete more than one revolution around the circle, and so the angle may be greater
than , and the arc length s may be greater than the circumference, .
FIGURE 10.2 A particle follows a circular path. As it moves counterclockwise, it sweeps out a positive angle with respect to the x-axis and
traces out an arc length s.
The angle is related to the radius of the circle and the arc length by
10.1
The angle , the angular position of the particle along its path, has units of radians (rad). There are radians in
Note that the radian measure is a ratio of length measurements, and therefore is a dimensionless quantity. As
the particle moves along its circular path, its angular position changes and it undergoes angular displacements
We can write infinitesimal displacement tangent to the circle using polar coordinates, as shown in Figure 10.3.
10.2
Access for free at openstax.org

10.1 • Rotational Variables 453
FIGURE 10.3 The position vector and arc-length vector both lie in the xy-plane and are perpendicular to each other. Note that as the
point rotates, the coordinate system also rotates and the directions of the unit vectors change.
The magnitude of the angular velocity, denoted by , is the time rate of change of the angle as the particle moves
in its circular path. The instantaneous angular velocity is defined as the limit in which in the average
angular velocity :
10.3
where is the angle of rotation (Figure 10.2). The units of angular velocity are radians per second (rad/s). Angular
velocity can also be referred to as the rotation rate in radians per second. In many situations, we are given the
rotation rate in revolutions/s or cycles/s. To find the angular velocity, we must multiply revolutions/s by , since
there are radians in one complete revolution. Since the direction of a positive angle in a circle is
counterclockwise, we take counterclockwise rotations as being positive and clockwise rotations as negative.
We can see how angular velocity is related to the tangential speed of the particle by differentiating Equation 10.1
with respect to time. We rewrite Equation 10.1 as
Taking the derivative with respect to time and noting that the radius r is a constant, we have
where . Here is just the tangential speed of the particle in Figure 10.2. Thus, by using Equation 10.3,
we arrive at
10.4
That is, the tangential speed of the particle is its angular velocity times the radius of the circle. From Equation 10.4,
we see that the tangential speed of the particle increases with its distance from the axis of rotation for a constant
angular velocity. This effect is shown in Figure 10.4. Two particles are placed at different radii on a rotating disk with
a constant angular velocity. As the disk rotates, the tangential speed increases linearly with the radius from the axis
of rotation. In Figure 10.4, we see that and . But the disk has a constant angular velocity, so
. This means or . Thus, since , .

454 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.4 Two particles on a rotating disk have different tangential speeds, depending on their distance to the axis of rotation.
Up until now, we have discussed the magnitude of the angular velocity which is a scalar quantity—the
change in angular position with respect to time. The vector is the vector associated with the angular velocity and
points along the axis of rotation. This is useful because when a rigid body is rotating, we want to know both the axis
of rotation and the direction that the body is rotating about the axis, clockwise or counterclockwise. The angular
velocity gives us this information. The angular velocity has a direction determined by what is called the right-
hand rule. The right-hand rule is such that if the fingers of your right hand wrap counterclockwise from the x-axis
(the direction in which increases) toward the y-axis, your thumb points in the direction of the positive z-axis
(Figure 10.5). An angular velocity that points along the positive z-axis therefore corresponds to a
counterclockwise rotation, whereas an angular velocity that points along the negative z-axis corresponds to a
clockwise rotation.
FIGURE 10.5 For counterclockwise rotation in the coordinate system shown, the angular velocity points in the positive z-direction by the
right-hand-rule.
One can state a cross product relation to the vector of the tangential velocity as stated in Equation 10.4. Therefore,
we have
10.5
Access for free at openstax.org

10.1 • Rotational Variables 455
That is, the tangential velocity is the cross product of the angular velocity and the position vector, as shown in Figure
10.6. From part (a) of this figure, we see that with the angular velocity in the positive z-direction, the rotation in the
xy-plane is counterclockwise. In part (b), the angular velocity is in the negative z-direction, giving a clockwise
rotation in the xy-plane.
FIGURE 10.6 The vectors shown are the angular velocity, position, and tangential velocity. (a) The angular velocity points in the positive
z-direction, giving a counterclockwise rotation in the xy-plane. (b) The angular velocity points in the negative z-direction, giving a clockwise
rotation.
EXAMPLE 10.1
Rotation of a Flywheel
A flywheel rotates such that it sweeps out an angle at the rate of radians. The wheel rotates
counterclockwise when viewed in the plane of the page. (a) What is the angular velocity of the flywheel? (b) What
direction is the angular velocity? (c) How many radians does the flywheel rotate through in 30 s? (d) What is the
tangential speed of a point on the flywheel 10 cm from the axis of rotation?
Strategy
The functional form of the angular position of the flywheel is given in the problem as , so by taking the
derivative with respect to time, we can find the angular velocity. We use the right-hand rule to find the angular
velocity. To find the angular displacement of the flywheel during 30 s, we seek the angular displacement , where
the change in angular position is between 0 and 30 s. To find the tangential speed of a point at a distance from the
axis of rotation, we multiply its distance times the angular velocity of the flywheel.
Solution
a. . We see that the angular velocity is a constant.
b. By the right-hand rule, we curl the fingers in the direction of rotation, which is counterclockwise in the plane of
the page, and the thumb points in the direction of the angular velocity, which is out of the page.
c. .
d. .
Significance
In 30 s, the flywheel has rotated through quite a number of revolutions, about 215 if we divide the angular
displacement by . A massive flywheel can be used to store energy in this way, if the losses due to friction are
minimal. Recent research has considered superconducting bearings on which the flywheel rests, with zero energy
loss due to friction.
Angular Acceleration
We have just discussed angular velocity for uniform circular motion, but not all motion is uniform. Envision an ice
skater spinning with his arms outstretched—when he pulls his arms inward, his angular velocity increases. Or think
about a computer’s hard disk slowing to a halt as the angular velocity decreases. We will explore these situations

456 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
later, but we can already see a need to define an angular acceleration for describing situations where changes.
The faster the change in , the greater the angular acceleration. We define the instantaneous angular acceleration
as the derivative of angular velocity with respect to time:
10.6
where we have taken the limit of the average angular acceleration, as .
The units of angular acceleration are (rad/s)/s, or .
In the same way as we defined the vector associated with angular velocity , we can define , the vector associated
with angular acceleration (Figure 10.7). If the angular velocity is along the positive z-axis, as in Figure 10.5, and
is positive, then the angular acceleration is positive and points along the axis. Similarly, if the angular velocity
is along the positive z-axis and is negative, then the angular acceleration is negative and points along the
axis.
FIGURE 10.7 The rotation is counterclockwise in both (a) and (b) with the angular velocity in the same direction. (a) The angular
acceleration is in the same direction as the angular velocity, which increases the rotation rate. (b) The angular acceleration is in the
opposite direction to the angular velocity, which decreases the rotation rate.
We can express the tangential acceleration vector as a cross product of the angular acceleration and the position
vector. This expression can be found by taking the time derivative of and is left as an exercise:
10.7
The vector relationships for the angular acceleration and tangential acceleration are shown in Figure 10.8.
FIGURE 10.8 (a) The angular acceleration is the positive z-direction and produces a tangential acceleration in a counterclockwise sense. (b)
The angular acceleration is in the negative z-direction and produces a tangential acceleration in the clockwise sense.
We can relate the tangential acceleration of a point on a rotating body at a distance from the axis of rotation in the
same way that we related the tangential speed to the angular velocity. If we differentiate Equation 10.4 with respect
to time, noting that the radius r is constant, we obtain
Access for free at openstax.org

10.1 • Rotational Variables 457
10.8
Thus, the tangential acceleration is the radius times the angular acceleration. Equation 10.4 and Equation 10.8
are important for the discussion of rolling motion (see Angular Momentum).
Let’s apply these ideas to the analysis of a few simple fixed-axis rotation scenarios. Before doing so, we present a
problem-solving strategy that can be applied to rotational kinematics: the description of rotational motion.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rotational Kinematics
1. Examine the situation to determine that rotational kinematics (rotational motion) is involved.
2. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A sketch of the situation
is useful.
3. Make a complete list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
4. Solve the appropriate equation or equations for the quantity to be determined (the unknown). It can be useful
to think in terms of a translational analog, because by now you are familiar with the equations of translational
motion.
5. Substitute the known values along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical
solutions complete with units. Be sure to use units of radians for angles.
6. Check your answer to see if it is reasonable: Does your answer make sense?
Now let’s apply this problem-solving strategy to a few specific examples.
EXAMPLE 10.2
A Spinning Bicycle Wheel
A bicycle mechanic mounts a bicycle on the repair stand and starts the rear wheel spinning from rest to a final
angular velocity of 250 rpm in 5.00 s. (a) Calculate the average angular acceleration in . (b) If she now hits the
brakes, causing an angular acceleration of −87.3 , how long does it take the wheel to stop?
Strategy
The average angular acceleration can be found directly from its definition because the final angular velocity
and time are given. We see that and is 5.00 s. For part (b), we know the
angular acceleration and the initial angular velocity. We can find the stopping time by using the definition of average
angular acceleration and solving for , yielding
Solution
a. Entering known information into the definition of angular acceleration, we get
Because is in revolutions per minute (rpm) and we want the standard units of for angular
acceleration, we need to convert from rpm to rad/s:
Entering this quantity into the expression for , we get