# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 714-717
############################################################

702 14 • Chapter Review
components in the system have on the output mass of 10.0 g and a 20.0-g magnet is placed on
force? How would this depend on whether or not it, what fraction of the cork will be submerged?
the fluid is moving? (c) Will the bar magnet and cork float in ethyl
alcohol?
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
72 . What percentage of an iron anchor’s weight will
64 . What fraction of ice is submerged when it floats
be supported by buoyant force when submerged
in freshwater, given the density of water at
in salt water?
is very close to ?
73 . Referring to Figure 14.20, prove that the
65 . If a person’s body has a density of ,
buoyant force on the cylinder is equal to the
what fraction of the body will be submerged
weight of the fluid displaced (Archimedes’
when floating gently in (a) freshwater? (b) In salt
principle). You may assume that the buoyant
water with a density of ?
force is and that the ends of the
66 . A rock with a mass of 540 g in air is found to cylinder have equal areas . Note that the
have an apparent mass of 342 g when volume of the cylinder (and that of the fluid it
submerged in water. (a) What mass of water is displaces) equals .
displaced? (b) What is the volume of the rock?
74 . A 75.0-kg man floats in freshwater with 3.00%
(c) What is its average density? Is this consistent
of his volume above water when his lungs are
with the value for granite?
empty, and 5.00% of his volume above water
67 . Archimedes’ principle can be used to calculate when his lungs are full. Calculate the volume of
the density of a fluid as well as that of a solid. air he inhales—called his lung capacity—in liters.
Suppose a chunk of iron with a mass of 390.0 g (b) Does this lung volume seem reasonable?
in air is found to have an apparent mass of 350.5
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
g when completely submerged in an unknown
liquid. (a) What mass of fluid does the iron 75 . What is the average flow rate in of
displace? (b) What is the volume of iron, using its gasoline to the engine of a car traveling at 100
density as given in Table 14.1? (c) Calculate the km/h if it averages 10.0 km/L?
fluid’s density and identify it.
76 . The heart of a resting adult pumps blood at a
68 . Calculate the buoyant force on a 2.00-L helium rate of 5.00 L/min. (a) Convert this to . (b)
balloon. (b) Given the mass of the rubber in the What is this rate in ?
balloon is 1.50 g, what is the net vertical force
77 . The Huka Falls on the Waikato River is one of
on the balloon if it is let go? Neglect the volume
New Zealand’s most visited natural tourist
of the rubber.
attractions. On average, the river has a flow rate
69 . What is the density of a woman who floats in of about 300,000 L/s. At the gorge, the river
fresh water with of her volume above the narrows to 20-m wide and averages 20-m deep.
surface? (This could be measured by placing her (a) What is the average speed of the river in the
in a tank with marks on the side to measure how gorge? (b) What is the average speed of the
much water she displaces when floating and water in the river downstream of the falls when
when held under water.) (b) What percent of her it widens to 60 m and its depth increases to an
volume is above the surface when she floats in average of 40 m?
seawater?
78 . (a) Estimate the time it would take to fill a
70 . A man has a mass of 80 kg and a density of private swimming pool with a capacity of 80,000
(excluding the air in his lungs). (a) L using a garden hose delivering 60 L/min. (b)
Calculate his volume. (b) Find the buoyant force How long would it take if you could divert a
air exerts on him. (c) What is the ratio of the moderate size river, flowing at into
buoyant force to his weight? the pool?
71 . A simple compass can be made by placing a 79 . What is the fluid speed in a fire hose with a
small bar magnet on a cork floating in water. (a) 9.00-cm diameter carrying 80.0 L of water per
What fraction of a plain cork will be submerged second? (b) What is the flow rate in cubic meters
when floating in water? (b) If the cork has a per second? (c) Would your answers be different
Access for free at openstax.org

14 • Chapter Review 703
if salt water replaced the fresh water in the fire maximum height above the nozzle can this water
hose? rise? (The actual height will be significantly
smaller due to air resistance.)
80 . Water is moving at a velocity of 2.00 m/s
through a hose with an internal diameter of 1.60 88 . (a) Using Bernoulli’s equation, show that the
cm. (a) What is the flow rate in liters per second? measured fluid speed v for a pitot tube, like the
(b) The fluid velocity in this hose’s nozzle is 15.0 one in Figure 14.32(b), is given by
m/s. What is the nozzle’s inside diameter?
, where h is the height of the
81 . Prove that the speed of an incompressible fluid
manometer fluid, is the density of the
through a constriction, such as in a Venturi tube,
manometer fluid, is the density of the moving
increases by a factor equal to the square of the
fluid, and g is the acceleration due to gravity.
factor by which the diameter decreases. (The
(Note that v is indeed proportional to the square
converse applies for flow out of a constriction
root of h, as stated in the text.) (b) Calculate v for
into a larger-diameter region.)
moving air if a mercury manometer’s h is 0.200
82 . Water emerges straight down from a faucet with m.
a 1.80-cm diameter at a speed of 0.500 m/s.
89 . A container of water has a cross-sectional area of
(Because of the construction of the faucet, there
. A piston sits on top of the water (see
is no variation in speed across the stream.) (a)
the following figure). There is a spout located 0.15
What is the flow rate in ? (b) What is the
m from the bottom of the tank, open to the
diameter of the stream 0.200 m below the
atmosphere, and a stream of water exits the spout.
faucet? Neglect any effects due to surface
The cross sectional area of the spout is
tension.
. (a) What is the velocity of the
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation water as it leaves the spout? (b) If the opening of the
spout is located 1.5 m above the ground, how far
83 . Verify that pressure has units of energy per unit
from the spout does the water hit the floor? Ignore
volume.
all friction and dissipative forces.
84 . Suppose you have a wind speed gauge like the
pitot tube shown in Figure 14.32. By what factor
must wind speed increase to double the value of
h in the manometer? Is this independent of the
moving fluid and the fluid in the manometer?
85 . If the pressure reading of your pitot tube is 15.0
mm Hg at a speed of 200 km/h, what will it be at
700 km/h at the same altitude?
86 . Every few years, winds in Boulder, Colorado,
attain sustained speeds of 45.0 m/s (about 100
mph) when the jet stream descends during early
spring. Approximately what is the force due to 90 . A fluid of a constant density flows through a
the Bernoulli equation on a roof having an area reduction in a pipe. Find an equation for the change
of ? Typical air density in Boulder is in pressure, in terms of , and the density.
, and the corresponding atmospheric
pressure is . (Bernoulli’s
principle as stated in the text assumes laminar
flow. Using the principle here produces only an
approximate result, because there is significant
turbulence.)
87 . What is the pressure drop due to the Bernoulli
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
Effect as water goes into a 3.00-cm-diameter
nozzle from a 9.00-cm-diameter fire hose while
91 . (a) Calculate the retarding force due to the
carrying a flow of 40.0 L/s? (b) To what
viscosity of the air layer between a cart and a

704 14 • Chapter Review
level air track given the following information: air what factor has the clot reduced the radius of
temperature is , the cart is moving at the artery?
0.400 m/s, its surface area is
98 . An oil gusher shoots crude oil 25.0 m into the air
and the thickness of the air layer is
through a pipe with a 0.100-m diameter.
. (b) What is the ratio of this
Neglecting air resistance but not the resistance
force to the weight of the 0.300-kg cart?
of the pipe, and assuming laminar flow, calculate
92 . The arterioles (small arteries) leading to an the pressure at the entrance of the 50.0-m-long
organ constrict in order to decrease flow to the vertical pipe. Take the density of the oil to be
organ. To shut down an organ, blood flow is and its viscosity to be
reduced naturally to 1.00% of its original value. (or ). Note that you must take into
By what factor do the radii of the arterioles account the pressure due to the 50.0-m column
constrict? of oil in the pipe.
93 . A spherical particle falling at a terminal speed in 99 . Concrete is pumped from a cement mixer to the
a liquid must have the gravitational force place it is being laid, instead of being carried in
balanced by the drag force and the buoyant wheelbarrows. The flow rate is 200 L/min
force. The buoyant force is equal to the weight of through a 50.0-m-long, 8.00-cm-diameter hose,
the displaced fluid, while the drag force is and the pressure at the pump is
assumed to be given by Stokes Law, . (a) Calculate the resistance
Show that the terminal speed is of the hose. (b) What is the viscosity of the
concrete, assuming the flow is laminar? (c) How
given by , where R is the
much power is being supplied, assuming the
radius of the sphere, is its density, and is
point of use is at the same level as the pump?
the density of the fluid, and the coefficient of
You may neglect the power supplied to increase
viscosity.
the concrete’s velocity.
94 . Using the equation of the previous problem, find
100 . Verify that the flow of oil is laminar for an oil
the viscosity of motor oil in which a steel ball of
gusher that shoots crude oil 25.0 m into the air
radius 0.8 mm falls with a terminal speed of
through a pipe with a 0.100-m diameter. The
4.32 cm/s. The densities of the ball and the oil
vertical pipe is 50 m long. Take the density of the
are 7.86 and 0.88 g/mL, respectively.
oil to be and its viscosity to be
95 . A skydiver will reach a terminal velocity when (or ).
the air drag equals their weight. For a skydiver
101 . Calculate the Reynolds numbers for the flow of
with a large body, turbulence is a factor at high
water through (a) a nozzle with a radius of 0.250
speeds. The drag force then is approximately
cm and (b) a garden hose with a radius of 0.900
proportional to the square of the velocity. Taking
cm, when the nozzle is attached to the hose. The
the drag force to be and setting
flow rate through hose and nozzle is 0.500 L/s.
this equal to the skydiver’s weight, find the Can the flow in either possibly be laminar?
terminal speed for a person falling “spread
102 . A fire hose has an inside diameter of 6.40 cm.
eagle.”
Suppose such a hose carries a flow of 40.0 L/s
96 . (a) Verify that a 19.0% decrease in laminar flow starting at a gauge pressure of
through a tube is caused by a 5.00% decrease in
. The hose goes 10.0 m up a
radius, assuming that all other factors remain
ladder to a nozzle having an inside diameter of
constant. (b) What increase in flow is obtained
3.00 cm. Calculate the Reynolds numbers for
from a 5.00% increase in radius, again assuming
flow in the fire hose and nozzle to show that the
all other factors remain constant?
flow in each must be turbulent.
97 . When physicians diagnose arterial blockages,
103 . At what flow rate might turbulence begin to
they quote the reduction in flow rate. If the flow
develop in a water main with a 0.200-m
rate in an artery has been reduced to 10.0% of
diameter? Assume a temperature.
its normal value by a blood clot and the average
pressure difference has increased by 20.0%, by
Access for free at openstax.org