# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 39-46
############################################################

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 31
Solution
Thesegmentonthesurface AB′ issharedbyboththetriangle ABB′ insidemedium1andthetriangle AA′B′
inside medium 2. Note that from the geometry, the angle ∠BAB′ is equal to the angle of incidence, θ .
1
Similarly, ∠AB′A′ is θ .
2
The length of AB′ is given in two ways as
AB′=
BB′
=
AA′
.
sinθ sinθ
1 2
Inverting the equation and substituting AA′=cΔt/n from above and similarly BB′=cΔt/n , we obtain
2 1
sinθ sinθ
1 = 2.
cΔt/n cΔt/n
1 2
Cancellation of cΔt allows us to simplify this equation into the familiar form
n sinθ =n sinθ .
1 1 2 2
Significance
AlthoughthelawofrefractionwasestablishedexperimentallybySnellandstatedinRefraction,itsderivation
here requires Huygens’s principle and the understanding that the speed of light is different in different media.
1.5 Check Your Understanding In Example 1.6, we had n <n . If n were decreased such that
1 2 2
n >n andthespeedoflightinmedium2isfasterthaninmedium1,whatwouldhappentothelengthof
1 2
AA′? What would happen to the wave front A′B′ and the direction of the refracted ray?
This applet (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21walfedaniref) by Walter Fendt shows an animation of
reflection and refraction using Huygens’s wavelets while you control the parameters. Be sure to click on “Next
step” to display the wavelets. You can see the reflected and refracted wave fronts forming.
Diffraction
Whathappenswhenawavepassesthroughanopening,suchaslightshiningthroughanopendoorintoadarkroom?For
light,weobserveasharpshadowofthedoorwayontheflooroftheroom,andnovisiblelightbendsaroundcornersinto
otherpartsoftheroom.Whensoundpassesthroughadoor,weheariteverywhereintheroomandthusobservethatsound
spreadsoutwhenpassingthroughsuchanopening(Figure 1.30).Whatisthedifferencebetweenthebehaviorofsound
waves and light waves in this case? The answer is that light has very short wavelengths and acts like a ray. Sound has
wavelengths on the order of the size of the door and bends around corners (for frequency of 1000 Hz,
λ= c = 330m/s =0.33m,
f 1000s−1
about three times smaller than the width of the doorway).

32 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Figure 1.30 (a) Light passing through a doorway makes a sharp outline on the floor. Since light’s
wavelength is very small compared with the size of the door, it acts like a ray. (b) Sound waves bend
into all parts of the room, a wave effect, because their wavelength is similar to the size of the door.
Ifwepasslightthroughsmalleropeningssuchasslits,wecanuseHuygens’sprincipletoseethatlightbendsassounddoes
(Figure1.31).Thebendingofawavearoundtheedgesofanopeningoranobstacleiscalleddiffraction.Diffractionisa
wavecharacteristicandoccursforalltypesofwaves.Ifdiffractionisobservedforsomephenomenon,itisevidencethatthe
phenomenonisawave.Thus,thehorizontaldiffractionofthelaserbeamafteritpassesthroughtheslitsinFigure1.31is
evidence that light is a wave. You will learn about diffraction in much more detail in the chapter onDiffraction.
Figure 1.31 Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave front striking an
opening. The edges of the wave front bend after passing through the opening, a
process called diffraction. The amount of bending is more extreme for a small
opening, consistent with the fact that wave characteristics are most noticeable for
interactions with objects about the same size as the wavelength.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 33
1.7 | Polarization
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the change in intensity as polarized light passes through a polarizing filter
• Calculate the effect of polarization by reflection and Brewster’s angle
• Describe the effect of polarization by scattering
• Explain the use of polarizing materials in devices such as LCDs
Polarizing sunglasses arefamiliar tomostofus.Theyhaveaspecial ability tocuttheglare oflight reflected fromwater
or glass (Figure 1.32). They have this ability because of a wave characteristic of light called polarization. What is
polarization? How is it produced? What are some of its uses? The answers to these questions are related to the wave
character of light.
Figure 1.32 These two photographs of a river show the effect of a polarizing filter in reducing glare in light reflected from the
surface of water. Part (b) of this figure was taken with a polarizing filter and part (a) was not. As a result, the reflection of clouds
and sky observed in part (a) is not observed in part (b). Polarizing sunglasses are particularly useful on snow and water. (credit a
and credit b: modifications of work by “Amithshs”/Wikimedia Commons)
Malus’s Law
Light is one type of electromagnetic (EM) wave. As noted in the previous chapter on Electromagnetic Waves
(http://cnx.org/content/m58495/latest/),EMwavesaretransversewavesconsistingofvaryingelectricandmagnetic
fieldsthatoscillateperpendiculartothedirectionofpropagation(Figure1.33).However,ingeneral,therearenospecific
directionsfortheoscillationsoftheelectricandmagneticfields;theyvibrateinanyrandomlyorientedplaneperpendicular
tothedirectionofpropagation.Polarizationistheattributethatawave’soscillationsdohaveadefinitedirectionrelative
tothedirectionofpropagationofthewave.(Thisisnotthesametypeofpolarizationasthatdiscussedfortheseparationof
charges.)Waveshavingsuchadirectionaresaidtobepolarized.ForanEMwave,wedefinethedirectionofpolarization
tobethedirectionparalleltotheelectricfield.Thus,wecanthinkoftheelectricfieldarrowsasshowingthedirectionof
polarization, as inFigure 1.33.

34 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Figure 1.33 An EM wave, such as light, is a transverse wave.
→ →
The electric ( E ) and magnetic ( B ) fields are
perpendicular to the direction of propagation. The direction of
polarization of the wave is the direction of the electric field.
To examine this further, consider the transverse waves in the ropes shown in Figure 1.34. The oscillations in one rope
are in a vertical plane and are said to be vertically polarized. Those in the other rope are in a horizontal plane and are
horizontallypolarized.Ifaverticalslitisplacedonthefirstrope,thewavespassthrough.However,averticalslitblocks
thehorizontallypolarizedwaves.ForEMwaves,thedirectionoftheelectricfieldisanalogoustothedisturbancesonthe
ropes.
Figure 1.34 The transverse oscillations in one rope (a) are in a vertical plane, and those in the other rope (b)
are in a horizontal plane. The first is said to be vertically polarized, and the other is said to be horizontally
polarized. Vertical slits pass vertically polarized waves and block horizontally polarized waves.
TheSunandmanyotherlightsourcesproducewavesthathavetheelectricfieldsinrandomdirections(Figure 1.35(a)).
Such light is said to be unpolarized, because it is composed of many waves with all possible directions of polarization.
Polaroidmaterials—whichwereinventedbythefounderofthePolaroidCorporation,EdwinLand—actasapolarizingslit
for light, allowing only polarization in one direction to pass through. Polarizing filters are composed of long molecules
aligned in one direction. If we think of the molecules as many slits, analogous to those for the oscillating ropes, we can
understandwhyonlylightwithaspecificpolarizationcangetthrough.Theaxisofapolarizingfilteristhedirectionalong
which the filter passes the electric field of an EM wave.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 35
Figure 1.35 The slender arrow represents a ray of unpolarized light. The bold arrows represent the direction of
polarization of the individual waves composing the ray. (a) If the light is unpolarized, the arrows point in all directions. (b)
A polarizing filter has a polarization axis that acts as a slit passing through electric fields parallel to its direction. The
direction of polarization of an EM wave is defined to be the direction of its electric field.
Figure 1.36 shows the effect of two polarizing filters on originally unpolarized light. The first filter polarizes the light
alongitsaxis.Whentheaxesofthefirstandsecondfiltersarealigned(parallel),thenallofthepolarizedlightpassedby
thefirstfilterisalsopassedbythesecondfilter.Ifthesecondpolarizingfilterisrotated,onlythecomponentofthelight
parallel to the second filter’s axis is passed. When the axes are perpendicular, no light is passed by the second filter.
Figure 1.36 The effect of rotating two polarizing filters, where the first polarizes the light. (a) All of the polarized light is
passed by the second polarizing filter, because its axis is parallel to the first. (b) As the second filter is rotated, only part of the
light is passed. (c) When the second filter is perpendicular to the first, no light is passed. (d) In this photograph, a polarizing filter
is placed above two others. Its axis is perpendicular to the filter on the right (dark area) and parallel to the filter on the left (lighter
area). (credit d: modification of work by P.P. Urone)

36 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
OnlythecomponentoftheEMwaveparalleltotheaxisofafilterispassed.Letuscalltheanglebetweenthedirectionof
polarizationandtheaxisofafilter θ.IftheelectricfieldhasanamplitudeE,thenthetransmittedpartofthewavehasan
amplitude Ecosθ (Figure1.37).Sincetheintensityofawaveisproportionaltoitsamplitudesquared,theintensityIof
the transmitted wave is related to the incident wave by
I =I cos2 θ (1.6)
0
where I is the intensity of the polarized wave before passing through the filter. This equation is known asMalus’s law.
0
Figure 1.37 A polarizing filter transmits only the component
of the wave parallel to its axis, reducing the intensity of any
light not polarized parallel to its axis.
This Open Source Physics animation (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21phyanielefie) helps you
visualize the electric field vectors as light encounters a polarizing filter. You can rotate the filter—note that the
angle displayed is in radians. You can also rotate the animation for 3D visualization.
Example 1.7
Calculating Intensity Reduction by a Polarizing Filter
What angle is needed between the direction of polarized light and the axis of a polarizing filter to reduce its
intensity by 90.0%?
Strategy
Whentheintensityisreducedby 90.0%,itis 10.0% or0.100timesitsoriginalvalue.Thatis, I =0.100I .
0
Using this information, the equation I =I cos2 θ can be used to solve for the needed angle.
0
Solution
Solving the equation I =I cos2 θ for cosθ and substituting with the relationship betweenIand I gives
0 0
cosθ= I = 0.100I 0 =0.3162.
I I
0 0
Solving for θ yields
θ=cos−1 0.3162=71.6°.
Significance
Afairlylargeanglebetweenthedirectionofpolarizationandthefilteraxisisneededtoreducetheintensityto
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 37
10.0% ofitsoriginalvalue.Thisseemsreasonablebasedonexperimentingwithpolarizingfilms.Itisinteresting
that at an angle of 45°,the intensity is reduced to 50% ofits original value. Note that 71.6° is 18.4° from
reducing the intensity to zero, and that at an angle of 18.4°, the intensity is reduced to 90.0% of its original
value, giving evidence of symmetry.
1.6 Check YourUnderstanding Although wedidnotspecify the direction inExample 1.7,let’ssaythe
polarizing filter wasrotated clockwise by 71.6° toreduce thelightintensity by 90.0%.Whatwouldbethe
intensity reduction if the polarizing filter were rotated counterclockwise by 71.6°?
Polarization by Reflection
Bynow,youcanprobablyguessthatpolarizingsunglassescuttheglareinreflectedlight,becausethatlightispolarized.
Youcancheckthisforyourselfbyholdingpolarizing sunglasses infrontofyouandrotating themwhilelookingatlight
reflectedfromwaterorglass.Asyourotatethesunglasses,youwillnoticethelightgetsbrightanddim,butnotcompletely
black. This implies the reflected light is partially polarized and cannot be completely blocked by a polarizing filter.
Figure 1.38 illustrates what happens when unpolarized light is reflected from a surface. Vertically polarized light is
preferentially refracted at the surface, so the reflected light is left more horizontally polarized. The reasons for this
phenomenon are beyond the scope of this text, but a convenient mnemonic for remembering this is to imagine the
polarization direction to be like an arrow. Vertical polarization is like an arrow perpendicular to the surface and is more
likely to stick and not be reflected. Horizontal polarization is like an arrow bouncing on its side and is more likely to be
reflected. Sunglasses with vertical axes thus block more reflected light than unpolarized light from other sources.
Figure 1.38 Polarization by reflection. Unpolarized light has equal amounts of vertical and horizontal
polarization. After interaction with a surface, the vertical components are preferentially absorbed or refracted,
leaving the reflected light more horizontally polarized. This is akin to arrows striking on their sides and
bouncing off, whereas arrows striking on their tips go into the surface.
Sincethepartofthelightthatisnotreflectedisrefracted,theamountofpolarizationdependsontheindicesofrefractionof
the media involved. It can be shown that reflected light is completely polarized at an angle of reflection θ given by
b
n (1.7)
tanθ b = n 2
1