# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 751-757
############################################################

15.6 • Forced Oscillations 739
FIGURE 15.30 Forced, damped harmonic motion produced by driving a spring and mass with a disk driven by a variable-speed motor.
Using Newton’s second law we can analyze the motion of the mass. The resulting equation is similar to
the force equation for the damped harmonic oscillator, with the addition of the driving force:
15.27
When an oscillator is forced with a periodic driving force, the motion may seem chaotic. The motions of the oscillator
is known as transients. After the transients die out, the oscillator reaches a steady state, where the motion is
periodic. After some time, the steady state solution to this differential equation is
15.28
Once again, it is left as an exercise to prove that this equation is a solution. Taking the first and second time
derivative of x(t) and substituting them into the force equation shows that is a solution as long
as the amplitude is equal to
15.29
where is the natural frequency of the mass/spring system. Recall that the angular frequency, and
therefore the frequency, of the motor can be adjusted. Looking at the denominator of the equation for the amplitude,
when the driving frequency is much smaller, or much larger, than the natural frequency, the square of the difference
of the two angular frequencies is positive and large, making the denominator large, and the result is a
small amplitude for the oscillations of the mass. As the frequency of the driving force approaches the natural
frequency of the system, the denominator becomes small and the amplitude of the oscillations becomes large. The
maximum amplitude results when the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the system
.
Figure 15.31 shows a graph of the amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the
periodic force driving it. Each of the three curves on the graph represents a different amount of damping. All three
curves peak at the point where the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the harmonic
oscillator. The highest peak, or greatest response, is for the least amount of damping, because less energy is
removed by the damping force. Note that since the amplitude grows as the damping decreases, taking this to the

740 15 • Oscillations
limit where there is no damping , the amplitude becomes infinite.
Note that a small-amplitude driving force can produce a large-amplitude response. This phenomenon is known as
resonance. A common example of resonance is a parent pushing a small child on a swing. When the child wants to
go higher, the parent does not move back and then, getting a running start, slam into the child, applying a great force
in a short interval. Instead, the parent applies small pushes to the child at just the right frequency, and the
amplitude of the child’s swings increases.
FIGURE 15.31 Amplitude of a harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the driving force. The curves represent the same
oscillator with the same natural frequency but with different amounts of damping. Resonance occurs when the driving frequency equals the
natural frequency, and the greatest response is for the least amount of damping. The narrowest response is also for the least damping.
It is interesting to note that the widths of the resonance curves shown in Figure 15.31 depend on damping: the less
the damping, the narrower the resonance. The consequence is that if you want a driven oscillator to resonate at a
very specific frequency, you need as little damping as possible. For instance, a radio has a circuit that is used to
choose a particular radio station. In this case, the forced damped oscillator consists of a resistor, capacitor, and
inductor, which will be discussed later in this course. The circuit is “tuned” to pick a particular radio station. Here it
is desirable to have the resonance curve be very narrow, to pick out the exact frequency of the radio station chosen.
The narrowness of the graph, and the ability to pick out a certain frequency, is known as the quality of the system.
The quality, Q, is defined as the spread of the angular frequency, or equivalently, as inverse of the fractional
bandwidth, i.e., the natural frequency divided by the spread in the frequency at half the maximum amplitude
as shown in Figure 15.32. For a small damping, the quality is approximately equal to .
FIGURE 15.32 The quality of a system is defined as the spread in the frequencies at half the amplitude divided by the natural frequency.
These features of driven harmonic oscillators apply to a huge variety of systems. For instance, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is a widely used medical diagnostic tool in which atomic nuclei (mostly hydrogen nuclei or protons)
are made to resonate by incoming radio waves (on the order of 100 MHz). In all of these cases, the efficiency of
Access for free at openstax.org

15.6 • Forced Oscillations 741
energy transfer from the driving force into the oscillator is best at resonance. Figure 15.33 shows the London
Millennium Footbridge that allows pedestrians to cross the River Thames in London. This bridge was nicknamed
“Wobbly Bridge” when pedestrians experienced swaying motion while crossing it. The bridge was closed for roughly
two years to get rid of this motion.
FIGURE 15.33 Initially when people crossed the London Millennium Footbridge, they experienced a swaying motion. People continuing to
cross reinforced the oscillation’s amplitude, thereby increasing the problematic swaying. (credit: Adrian Pingstone/Wikimedia Commons)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.6
A famous magic trick involves a performer singing a note toward a crystal glass until the glass shatters. Explain why
the trick works in terms of resonance and natural frequency.

742 15 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
amplitude (A) maximum displacement from the or sine function to shift the function left or right,
equilibrium position of an object oscillating around used to match up the function with the initial
the equilibrium position conditions of data
critically damped condition in which the damping of physical pendulum any extended object that swings
an oscillator causes it to return as quickly as like a pendulum
possible to its equilibrium position without resonance large amplitude oscillations in a system
oscillating back and forth about this position produced by a small amplitude driving force, which
elastic potential energy potential energy stored as a has a frequency equal to the natural frequency
result of deformation of an elastic object, such as restoring force force acting in opposition to the force
the stretching of a spring caused by a deformation
equilibrium position position where the spring is simple harmonic motion (SHM) oscillatory motion in
neither stretched nor compressed a system where the restoring force is proportional to
force constant (k) characteristic of a spring which is the displacement, which acts in the direction
defined as the ratio of the force applied to the spring opposite to the displacement
to the displacement caused by the force simple harmonic oscillator a device that oscillates in
frequency (f) number of events per unit of time SHM where the restoring force is proportional to the
natural angular frequency angular frequency of a displacement and acts in the direction opposite to
system oscillating in SHM the displacement
oscillation single fluctuation of a quantity, or simple pendulum point mass, called a pendulum
repeated and regular fluctuations of a quantity, bob, attached to a near massless string
between two extreme values around an equilibrium stable equilibrium point point where the net force on
or average value a system is zero, but a small displacement of the
overdamped condition in which damping of an mass will cause a restoring force that points toward
oscillator causes it to return to equilibrium without the equilibrium point
oscillating; oscillator moves more slowly toward torsional pendulum any suspended object that
equilibrium than in the critically damped system oscillates by twisting its suspension
period (T) time taken to complete one oscillation underdamped condition in which damping of an
periodic motion motion that repeats itself at regular oscillator causes the amplitude of oscillations of a
time intervals damped harmonic oscillator to decrease over time,
phase shift angle, in radians, that is used in a cosine eventually approaching zero
Key Equations
Relationship between frequency and period
General position in SHM
General velocity in SHM
General acceleration in SHM
Maximum displacement (amplitude) of SHM
Maximum velocity of SHM
Maximum acceleration of SHM
Angular frequency of a mass-spring system in SHM
Period of a mass-spring system in SHM
Frequency of a mass-spring system in SHM
Energy in a mass-spring system in SHM
The velocity of the mass in a spring-mass
system in SHM
Access for free at openstax.org

15 • Chapter Review 743
The x-component of the radius of a rotating disk
The x-component of the velocity of the edge of a rotating disk
The x-component of the acceleration of the
edge of a rotating disk
Force equation for a simple pendulum
Angular frequency for a simple pendulum
Period of a simple pendulum
Angular frequency of a physical pendulum
Period of a physical pendulum
Period of a torsional pendulum
Newton’s second law for harmonic motion
Solution for underdamped harmonic motion
Natural angular frequency of a
mass-spring system
Angular frequency of underdamped
harmonic motion
Newton’s second law for forced,
damped oscillation
Solution to Newton’s second law for forced,
damped oscillations
Amplitude of system undergoing forced,
damped oscillations
Summary
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
• Periodic motion is a repeating oscillation. The where .
time for one oscillation is the period T and the • The acceleration is
number of oscillations per unit time is the
frequency f. These quantities are related by , where .
.
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
• Simple harmonic motion (SHM) is oscillatory
motion for a system where the restoring force is • The simplest type of oscillations are related to
proportional to the displacement and acts in the systems that can be described by Hooke’s law, F
direction opposite to the displacement. = −kx, where F is the restoring force, x is the
• Maximum displacement is the amplitude A. The displacement from equilibrium or deformation,
angular frequency , period T, and frequency f of and k is the force constant of the system.
a simple harmonic oscillator are given by • Elastic potential energy U stored in the
, , deformation of a system that can be described by
Hooke’s law is given by
where m is the mass of the system and k is the
• Energy in the simple harmonic oscillator is
force constant.
shared between elastic potential energy and
• Displacement as a function of time in SHM is
kinetic energy, with the total being constant:
given by
.
• The velocity is given by

744 15 • Chapter Review
• The magnitude of the velocity as a function of rotation and the center of mass is L.
position for the simple harmonic oscillator can be
• The period of a torsional pendulum
found by using
can be found if the moment of inertia and torsion
constant are known.
15.5 Damped Oscillations
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and
Circular Motion • Damped harmonic oscillators have non-
conservative forces that dissipate their energy.
• A projection of uniform circular motion
• Critical damping returns the system to
undergoes simple harmonic oscillation.
equilibrium as fast as possible without
• Consider a circle with a radius A, moving at a
overshooting.
constant angular speed . A point on the edge of
• An underdamped system will oscillate through
the circle moves at a constant tangential speed
the equilibrium position.
of . The projection of the radius onto
• An overdamped system moves more slowly
the x-axis is , where is
toward equilibrium than one that is critically
the phase shift. The x-component of the
damped.
tangential velocity is .
15.6 Forced Oscillations
15.4 Pendulums
• A system’s natural frequency is the frequency at
• A mass m suspended by a wire of length L and
which the system oscillates if not affected by
negligible mass is a simple pendulum and
driving or damping forces.
undergoes SHM for amplitudes less than about
• A periodic force driving a harmonic oscillator at
. The period of a simple pendulum is
its natural frequency produces resonance. The
, where L is the length of the string system is said to resonate.
• The less damping a system has, the higher the
and g is the acceleration due to gravity.
amplitude of the forced oscillations near
• The period of a physical pendulum
resonance. The more damping a system has, the
can be found if the moment of
broader response it has to varying driving
inertia is known. The length between the point of frequencies.
Conceptual Questions
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion 6 . Some people modify cars to be much closer to
the ground than when manufactured. Should
1 . What conditions must be met to produce SHM?
they install stiffer springs? Explain your answer.
2 . (a) If frequency is not constant for some
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
oscillation, can the oscillation be SHM? (b) Can
you think of any examples of harmonic motion 7 . Describe a system in which elastic potential
where the frequency may depend on the energy is stored.
amplitude?
8 . Explain in terms of energy how dissipative forces
3 . Give an example of a simple harmonic oscillator, such as friction reduce the amplitude of a
specifically noting how its frequency is harmonic oscillator. Also explain how a driving
independent of amplitude. mechanism can compensate. (A pendulum clock
is such a system.)
4 . Explain why you expect an object made of a stiff
material to vibrate at a higher frequency than a 9 . The temperature of the atmosphere oscillates
similar object made of a more pliable material. from a maximum near noontime and a minimum
near sunrise. Would you consider the
5 . As you pass a freight truck with a trailer on a
atmosphere to be in stable or unstable
highway, you notice that its trailer is bouncing up
equilibrium?
and down slowly. Is it more likely that the trailer
is heavily loaded or nearly empty? Explain your
answer.
Access for free at openstax.org