# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 51-57
############################################################

1 • Chapter Review 39
course in 2 h, 30 min, and 12 s. There is an pound-mass unit, what is its percent
uncertainty of 25 m in the distance traveled and uncertainty? (b) Based on that percent
an uncertainty of 1 s in the elapsed time. (a) uncertainty, what mass in pound-mass has an
Calculate the percent uncertainty in the uncertainty of 1 kg when converted to
distance. (b) Calculate the percent uncertainty in kilograms?
the elapsed time. (c) What is the average speed
86 . The length and width of a rectangular room are
in meters per second? (d) What is the
measured to be 3.955 ± 0.005 m and 3.050 ±
uncertainty in the average speed?
0.005 m. Calculate the area of the room and its
84 . The sides of a small rectangular box are uncertainty in square meters.
measured to be 1.80 ± 0.1 cm, 2.05 ± 0.02 cm,
87 . A car engine moves a piston with a circular
and 3.1 ± 0.1 cm long. Calculate its volume and
cross-section of 7.500 ± 0.002 cm in diameter a
uncertainty in cubic centimeters.
distance of 3.250 ± 0.001 cm to compress the
85 . When nonmetric units were used in the United gas in the cylinder. (a) By what amount is the gas
Kingdom, a unit of mass called the pound-mass decreased in volume in cubic centimeters? (b)
(lbm) was used, where 1 lbm = 0.4539 kg. (a) If Find the uncertainty in this volume.
there is an uncertainty of 0.0001 kg in the
Challenge Problems
88 . The first atomic bomb was detonated on July 16, radius of 130.0 m. Use these values, along with
1945, at the Trinity test site about 200 mi south an average air density of 1.25 kg/m3, to
of Los Alamos. In 1947, the U.S. government calculate the initial energy release of the Trinity
declassified a film reel of the explosion. From detonation in joules (J). (Hint: To get energy in
this film reel, British physicist G. I. Taylor was joules, you need to make sure all the numbers
able to determine the rate at which the radius of you substitute in are expressed in terms of SI
the fireball from the blast grew. Using base units.) (c) The energy released in large
dimensional analysis, he was then able to explosions is often cited in units of “tons of TNT”
deduce the amount of energy released in the (abbreviated “t TNT”), where 1 t TNT is about
explosion, which was a closely guarded secret at 4.2 GJ. Convert your answer to (b) into kilotons
the time. Because of this, Taylor did not publish of TNT (that is, kt TNT). Compare your answer
his results until 1950. This problem challenges with the quick-and-dirty estimate of 10 kt TNT
you to recreate this famous calculation. (a) Using made by physicist Enrico Fermi shortly after
keen physical insight developed from years of witnessing the explosion from what was thought
experience, Taylor decided the radius r of the to be a safe distance. (Reportedly, Fermi made
fireball should depend only on the following his estimate by dropping some shredded bits of
variables: paper right before the remnants of the shock
t, the time since the explosion, wave hit him and looked to see how far they
and the density of the air, were carried by it.)
E, the energy of the inital explosion.
89 . The purpose of this problem is to show the
Thus, he made the educated guess that
entire concept of dimensional consistency can
for some dimensionless constant k
be summarized by the old saying “You can’t add
and some unknown exponents a, b, and c. Given
apples and oranges.” If you have studied power
that [E] = ML2T–2, determine the values of the
series expansions in a calculus course, you know
exponents necessary to make this equation
the standard mathematical functions such as
dimensionally consistent. (Hint: Notice the
trigonometric functions, logarithms, and
equation implies that and that
exponential functions can be expressed as
) (b) By analyzing data from high-energy
infinite sums of the form
conventional explosives, Taylor found the
∞
formula he derived seemed to be valid as long as
the constant k had the value 1.03. From the film
reel, he was able to determine many values of r
and the corresponding values of t. For example, where the are dimensionless constants for all
he found that after 25.0 ms, the fireball had a and x is the argument of the

40 1 • Chapter Review
function. (If you have not studied power series in mathematical functions must be dimensionless,
calculus yet, just trust us.) Use this fact to so it is not really necessary to make this latter
explain why the requirement that all terms in an condition a separate requirement of the
equation have the same dimensions is sufficient definition of dimensional consistency as we have
as a definition of dimensional consistency. That done in this section.
is, it actually implies the arguments of standard
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 2
Vectors
FIGURE 2.1 A signpost gives information about distances and directions to towns or to other locations relative to the location of the
signpost. Distance is a scalar quantity. Knowing the distance alone is not enough to get to the town; we must also know the direction from
the signpost to the town. The direction, together with the distance, is a vector quantity commonly called the displacement vector. A
signpost, therefore, gives information about displacement vectors from the signpost to towns. (credit: modification of work by "studio
tdes"/Flickr, thedailyenglishshow.com)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1 Scalars and Vectors
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
2.3 Algebra of Vectors
2.4 Products of Vectors
INTRODUCTION Vectors are essential to physics and engineering. Many fundamental physical quantities are
vectors, including displacement, velocity, force, and electric and magnetic vector fields. Scalar products of vectors
define other fundamental scalar physical quantities, such as energy. Vector products of vectors define still other
fundamental vector physical quantities, such as torque and angular momentum. In other words, vectors are a
component part of physics in much the same way as sentences are a component part of literature.
In introductory physics, vectors are Euclidean quantities that have geometric representations as arrows in one
dimension (in a line), in two dimensions (in a plane), or in three dimensions (in space). They can be added,
subtracted, or multiplied. In this chapter, we explore elements of vector algebra for applications in mechanics and in
electricity and magnetism. Vector operations also have numerous generalizations in other branches of physics.

42 2 • Vectors
2.1 Scalars and Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the difference between vector and scalar quantities.
• Identify the magnitude and direction of a vector.
• Explain the effect of multiplying a vector quantity by a scalar.
• Describe how one-dimensional vector quantities are added or subtracted.
• Explain the geometric construction for the addition or subtraction of vectors in a plane.
• Distinguish between a vector equation and a scalar equation.
Many familiar physical quantities can be specified completely by giving a single number and the appropriate unit.
For example, “a class period lasts 50 min” or “the gas tank in my car holds 65 L” or “the distance between two posts
is 100 m.” A physical quantity that can be specified completely in this manner is called a scalar quantity. Scalar is a
synonym of “number.” Time, mass, distance, length, volume, temperature, and energy are examples of scalar
quantities.
Scalar quantities that have the same physical units can be added or subtracted according to the usual rules of
algebra for numbers. For example, a class ending 10 min earlier than 50 min lasts .
Similarly, a 60-cal serving of corn followed by a 200-cal serving of donuts gives of
energy. When we multiply a scalar quantity by a number, we obtain the same scalar quantity but with a larger (or
smaller) value. For example, if yesterday’s breakfast had 200 cal of energy and today’s breakfast has four times as
much energy as it had yesterday, then today’s breakfast has of energy. Two scalar quantities
can also be multiplied or divided by each other to form a derived scalar quantity. For example, if a train covers a
distance of 100 km in 1.0 h, its speed is 100.0 km/1.0 h = 27.8 m/s, where the speed is a derived scalar quantity
obtained by dividing distance by time.
Many physical quantities, however, cannot be described completely by just a single number of physical units. For
example, when the U.S. Coast Guard dispatches a ship or a helicopter for a rescue mission, the rescue team must
know not only the distance to the distress signal, but also the direction from which the signal is coming so they can
get to its origin as quickly as possible. Physical quantities specified completely by giving a number of units
(magnitude) and a direction are called vector quantities. Examples of vector quantities include displacement,
velocity, position, force, and torque. In the language of mathematics, physical vector quantities are represented by
mathematical objects called vectors (Figure 2.2). We can add or subtract two vectors, and we can multiply a vector
by a scalar or by another vector, but we cannot divide by a vector. The operation of division by a vector is not
defined.
FIGURE 2.2 We draw a vector from the initial point or origin (called the “tail” of a vector) to the end or terminal point (called the “head” of a
vector), marked by an arrowhead. Magnitude is the length of a vector and is always a positive scalar quantity. (credit "photo": modification
of work by Cate Sevilla)
Let’s examine vector algebra using a graphical method to be aware of basic terms and to develop a qualitative
understanding. In practice, however, when it comes to solving physics problems, we use analytical methods, which
we’ll see in the next section. Analytical methods are more simple computationally and more accurate than graphical
methods. From now on, to distinguish between a vector and a scalar quantity, we adopt the common convention
that a letter in bold type with an arrow above it denotes a vector, and a letter without an arrow denotes a scalar. For
example, a distance of 2.0 km, which is a scalar quantity, is denoted by d = 2.0 km, whereas a displacement of 2.0
Access for free at openstax.org

2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 43
km in some direction, which is a vector quantity, is denoted by .
Suppose you tell a friend on a camping trip that you have discovered a terrific fishing hole 6 km from your tent. It is
unlikely your friend would be able to find the hole easily unless you also communicate the direction in which it can
be found with respect to your campsite. You may say, for example, “Walk about 6 km northeast from my tent.” The
key concept here is that you have to give not one but two pieces of information—namely, the distance or magnitude
(6 km) and the direction (northeast).
Displacement is a general term used to describe a change in position, such as during a trip from the tent to the
fishing hole. Displacement is an example of a vector quantity. If you walk from the tent (location A) to the hole
(location B), as shown in Figure 2.3, the vector , representing your displacement, is drawn as the arrow that
originates at point A and ends at point B. The arrowhead marks the end of the vector. The direction of the
displacement vector is the direction of the arrow. The length of the arrow represents the magnitude D of vector
. Here, D = 6 km. Since the magnitude of a vector is its length, which is a positive number, the magnitude is also
indicated by placing the absolute value notation around the symbol that denotes the vector; so, we can write
equivalently that . To solve a vector problem graphically, we need to draw the vector to scale. For
example, if we assume 1 unit of distance (1 km) is represented in the drawing by a line segment of length u = 2 cm,
then the total displacement in this example is represented by a vector of length , as
shown in Figure 2.4. Notice that here, to avoid confusion, we used to denote the magnitude of the actual
displacement and d = 12 cm to denote the length of its representation in the drawing.
FIGURE 2.3 The displacement vector from point A (the initial position at the campsite) to point B (the final position at the fishing hole) is
indicated by an arrow with origin at point A and end at point B. The displacement is the same for any of the actual paths (dashed curves)
that may be taken between points A and B.
FIGURE 2.4 A displacement of magnitude 6 km is drawn to scale as a vector of length 12 cm when the length of 2 cm represents 1 unit of
displacement (which in this case is 1 km).
Suppose your friend walks from the campsite at A to the fishing pond at B and then walks back: from the fishing
pond at B to the campsite at A. The magnitude of the displacement vector from A to B is the same as the
magnitude of the displacement vector from B to A (it equals 6 km in both cases), so we can write

44 2 • Vectors
. However, vector is not equal to vector because these two vectors have different
directions: . In Figure 2.3, vector would be represented by a vector with an origin at point B and
an end at point A, indicating vector points to the southwest, which is exactly opposite to the direction of
vector . We say that vector is antiparallel to vector and write , where the minus sign
indicates the antiparallel direction.
Two vectors that have identical directions are said to be parallel vectors—meaning, they are parallel to each other.
Two parallel vectors and are equal, denoted by , if and only if they have equal magnitudes . Two
vectors with directions perpendicular to each other are said to be orthogonal vectors. These relations between
vectors are illustrated in Figure 2.5.
FIGURE 2.5 Various relations between two vectors and . (a) because . (b) because they are not parallel and
. (c) because they have different directions (even though . (d) because they are parallel and have
identical magnitudes A = B. (e) because they have different directions (are not parallel); here, their directions differ by
—meaning, they are orthogonal.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.1
Two motorboats named Alice and Bob are moving on a lake. Given the information about their velocity vectors in
each of the following situations, indicate whether their velocity vectors are equal or otherwise. (a) Alice moves north
at 6 knots and Bob moves west at 6 knots. (b) Alice moves west at 6 knots and Bob moves west at 3 knots. (c) Alice
moves northeast at 6 knots and Bob moves south at 3 knots. (d) Alice moves northeast at 6 knots and Bob moves
southwest at 6 knots. (e) Alice moves northeast at 2 knots and Bob moves closer to the shore northeast at 2 knots.
Algebra of Vectors in One Dimension
Vectors can be multiplied by scalars, added to other vectors, or subtracted from other vectors. We can illustrate
these vector concepts using an example of the fishing trip seen in Figure 2.6.
Access for free at openstax.org