# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 193-198
############################################################

Chapter 5 | Relativity 185
5 | RELATIVITY
Figure 5.1 Special relativity explains how time passes slightly differently on Earth and within the rapidly moving global
positioning satellite (GPS). GPS units in vehicles could not find their correct location on Earth without taking this correction into
account. (credit: modification of work by U.S. Air Force)
Chapter Outline
5.1Invariance of Physical Laws
5.2Relativity of Simultaneity
5.3Time Dilation
5.4Length Contraction
5.5The Lorentz Transformation
5.6Relativistic Velocity Transformation
5.7Doppler Effect for Light
5.8Relativistic Momentum
5.9Relativistic Energy
Introduction
The special theory of relativity was proposed in 1905 by Albert Einstein (1879–1955). It describes how time, space, and
physicalphenomenaappearindifferentframesofreferencethataremovingatconstantvelocitywithrespecttoeachother.
ThisdiffersfromEinstein’slaterworkongeneralrelativity,whichdealswithanyframeofreference,includingaccelerated
frames.
Thetheoryofrelativityledtoaprofoundchangeinthewayweperceivespaceandtime.The“commonsense”rulesthat
weusetorelatespaceandtimemeasurementsintheNewtonianworldviewdifferseriouslyfromthecorrectrulesatspeeds
nearthespeedoflight.Forexample,thespecialtheoryofrelativitytellsusthatmeasurementsoflengthandtimeintervals
are not the same in reference frames moving relative to one another. A particle might be observed to have a lifetime of
1.0×10 −8 s inonereferenceframe,butalifetimeof 2.0×10 −8 s inanother;andanobjectmightbemeasuredtobe
2.0mlonginoneframeand3.0mlonginanotherframe.Theseeffectsareusuallysignificantonlyatspeedscomparableto
thespeedoflight,butevenatthemuchlowerspeedsoftheglobalpositioningsatellite,whichrequiresextremelyaccurate
time measurements to function, the different lengths of the same distance in different frames of reference are significant

186 Chapter 5 | Relativity
enough that they need to be taken into account.
Unlike Newtonian mechanics, which describes the motion of particles, or Maxwell's equations, which specify how the
electromagnetic field behaves, special relativity is not restricted to a particular type of phenomenon. Instead, its rules on
space and time affect all fundamental physical theories.
ThemodificationsofNewtonianmechanicsinspecialrelativitydonotinvalidateclassicalNewtonianmechanicsorrequire
its replacement. Instead, the equations of relativistic mechanics differ meaningfully from those of classical Newtonian
mechanics only for objects moving at relativistic speeds (i.e., speeds less than, but comparable to, the speed of light). In
the macroscopic world that you encounter in your daily life, the relativistic equations reduce to classical equations, and
the predictions of classical Newtonian mechanics agree closely enough with experimental results to disregard relativistic
corrections.
5.1 | Invariance of Physical Laws
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the theoretical and experimental issues that Einstein’s theory of special relativity
addressed.
• State the two postulates of the special theory of relativity.
Supposeyoucalculatethehypotenuseofarighttrianglegiventhebaseanglesandadjacentsides.Whetheryoucalculate
the hypotenuse from one of the sides and the cosine of the base angle, or from the Pythagorean theorem, the results
shouldagree.Predictionsbasedondifferentprinciplesofphysicsmustalsoagree,whetherweconsiderthemprinciplesof
mechanics or principles of electromagnetism.
Albert Einstein pondered a disagreement between predictions based on electromagnetism and on assumptions made in
classical mechanics. Specifically, suppose an observer measures the velocity of a light pulse in the observer’s own rest
frame; that is, in the frame of reference in which the observer is at rest. According to the assumptions long considered
obvious in classical mechanics, if an observer measures a velocity → v in one frame of reference, and that frame of
referenceismovingwithvelocity → u pastasecondreferenceframe,anobserverinthesecondframemeasurestheoriginal
velocityas → v′ = → v + → u . ThissumofvelocitiesisoftenreferredtoasGalileanrelativity.Ifthisprincipleiscorrect,
thepulseoflightthattheobservermeasuresastravelingwithspeedctravelsatspeedc+umeasuredintheframeofthe
secondobserver.Ifwereasonablyassumethatthelawsofelectrodynamicsarethesameinbothframesofreference,thenthe
predictedspeedoflight(invacuum)inbothframesshouldbe c=1/ ε µ . Eachobservershouldmeasurethesamespeed
0 0
ofthelightpulsewithrespecttothatobserver’sownrestframe.Toreconciledifficultiesofthiskind,Einsteinconstructed
hisspecialtheoryofrelativity,whichintroducedradicalnewideasabouttimeandspacethathavesincebeenconfirmed
experimentally.
Inertial Frames
All velocities are measured relative to some frame of reference. For example, a car’s motion is measured relative to its
startingpositionontheroadittravelson;aprojectile’smotionismeasuredrelativetothesurfacefromwhichitislaunched;
andaplanet’sorbitalmotionismeasuredrelativetothestaritorbits.Theframesofreferenceinwhichmechanicstakesthe
simplest form are those that are not accelerating. Newton’s first law, the law of inertia, holds exactly in such a frame.
Inertial Reference Frame
Aninertialframeofreferenceisareferenceframeinwhichabodyatrestremainsatrestandabodyinmotionmoves
at a constant speed in a straight line unless acted upon by an outside force.
For example, to a passenger inside a plane flying at constant speed and constant altitude, physics seems to work exactly
the same as when the passenger is standing on the surface of Earth. When the plane is taking off, however, matters are
somewhatmorecomplicated.Inthiscase,thepassengeratrestinsidetheplaneconcludesthatanetforceFonanobject
isnotequaltotheproductofmassandacceleration,ma.Instead,Fisequaltomaplusafictitiousforce.Thissituationis
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 5 | Relativity 187
notassimpleasinaninertialframe.Theterm“special”in“specialrelativity”referstodealingonlywithinertialframesof
reference.Einstein’slatertheoryofgeneralrelativitydealswithallkindsofreferenceframes,includingaccelerating,and
therefore non-inertial, reference frames.
Einstein’s First Postulate
Notonlyaretheprinciplesofclassicalmechanicssimplestininertialframes,buttheyarethesameinallinertialframes.
Einsteinbasedthefirstpostulateofhistheoryontheideathatthisistrueforallthelawsofphysics,notmerelythosein
mechanics.
First Postulate of Special Relativity
The laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames of reference.
This postulate denies the existence of a special or preferred inertial frame. The laws of nature do not give us a way to
endowanyoneinertialframewithspecialproperties.Forexample,wecannotidentifyanyinertialframeasbeinginastate
of “absolute rest.” We can only determine the relative motion of one frame with respect to another.
There is, however, more to this postulate than meets the eye. The laws of physics include only those that satisfy this
postulate.Wewillseethatthedefinitionsofenergyandmomentummustbealteredtofitthispostulate.Anotheroutcome
of this postulate is the famous equation E=mc2, which relates energy to mass.
Einstein’s Second Postulate
The second postulate upon which Einstein based his theory of special relativity deals with the speed of light. Late in the
nineteenth century, the major tenets of classical physics were well established. Two of the most important were the laws
of electromagnetism and Newton’s laws. Investigations such as Young’s double-slit experiment in the early 1800s had
convincingly demonstrated that light is a wave. Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism implied that electromagnetic
waves travel at c=3.00×10 8 m/s in a vacuum, but they do not specify the frame of reference in which light has this
speed.Manytypesofwaveswereknown,andalltravelledinsomemedium.Scientiststhereforeassumedthatsomemedium
carried the light, even in a vacuum, and that light travels at a speedcrelative to that medium (often called “the aether”).
Starting in the mid-1880s, the American physicist A.A. Michelson, later aided by E.W. Morley, made a series of direct
measurementsofthespeedoflight.TheyintendedtodeducefromtheirdatathespeedvatwhichEarthwasmovingthrough
themysteriousmediumforlightwaves.ThespeedoflightmeasuredonEarthshouldhavebeenc vwhenEarth’smotion
+
wasoppositetothemedium’sflowatspeedupasttheEarth,andc–vwhenEarthwasmovinginthesamedirectionasthe
medium. The results of their measurements were startling.
Michelson-Morley Experiment
TheMichelson-Morleyexperimentdemonstratedthatthespeedoflightinavacuumisindependentofthemotionof
Earth about the Sun.
The eventual conclusion derived from this result is that light, unlike mechanical waves such as sound, does not need a
mediumtocarryit.Furthermore,theMichelson-Morleyresultsimpliedthatthespeedoflightcisindependentofthemotion
of the source relative to the observer. That is, everyone observes light to move at speed c regardless of how they move
relativetothelightsourceortooneanother.Forseveralyears,manyscientiststriedunsuccessfullytoexplaintheseresults
within the framework of Newton’s laws.
In addition, there was a contradiction between the principles of electromagnetism and the assumption made in Newton’s
lawsaboutrelativevelocity.Classically,thevelocityofanobjectinoneframeofreferenceandthevelocityofthatobjectin
asecondframeofreferencerelativetothefirstshouldcombinelikesimplevectorstogivethevelocityseeninthesecond
frame. If that were correct, then two observers moving at different speeds would see light traveling at different speeds.
Imaginewhatalightwavewouldlookliketoapersontravelingalongwithit(invacuum)ataspeedc.Ifsuchamotion
werepossible,thenthewavewouldbestationaryrelativetotheobserver.Itwouldhaveelectricandmagneticfieldswhose
strengthsvariedwithpositionbutwereconstantintime.ThisisnotallowedbyMaxwell’sequations.SoeitherMaxwell’s
equationsaredifferentindifferentinertialframes,oranobjectwithmasscannottravelatspeedc.Einsteinconcludedthat
thelatteristrue:Anobjectwithmasscannottravelatspeedc.Maxwell’sequationsarecorrect,butNewton’sadditionof
velocities is not correct for light.

188 Chapter 5 | Relativity
Notuntil1905,whenEinsteinpublishedhisfirstpaperonspecialrelativity,wasthecurrentlyacceptedconclusionreached.
Basedmostlyonhisanalysisthatthelawsofelectricityandmagnetismwouldnotallowanotherspeedforlight,andonly
slightly aware of the Michelson-Morley experiment, Einstein detailed hissecond postulate of special relativity.
Second Postulate of Special Relativity
Light travels in a vacuum with the same speedcin any direction in all inertial frames.
In other words, the speed of light has the same definite speed for any observer, regardless of the relative motion of the
source.Thisdeceptivelysimpleandcounterintuitivepostulate,alongwiththefirstpostulate,leaveallelseopenforchange.
Among the changes are the loss of agreement on the time between events, the variation of distance with speed, and the
realization that matter and energy can be converted into one another. We describe these concepts in the following sections.
5.1 Check Your UnderstandingExplain how special relativity differs from general relativity.
5.2 | Relativity of Simultaneity
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Show from Einstein's postulates that two events measured as simultaneous in one inertial
frame are not necessarily simultaneous in all inertial frames.
• Describe how simultaneity is a relative concept for observers in different inertial frames in
relative motion.
Dotimeintervalsdependonwhoobservesthem?Intuitively,itseemsthatthetimeforaprocess,suchastheelapsedtime
forafootrace(Figure5.2),shouldbethesameforallobservers.Ineverydayexperiences,disagreementsoverelapsedtime
havetodowiththeaccuracyofmeasuringtime.Noonewouldbelikelytoarguethattheactualtimeintervalwasdifferent
for the moving runner and for the stationary clock displayed. Carefully considering just how time is measured, however,
shows that elapsed time does depends on the relative motion of an observer with respect to the process being measured.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 5 | Relativity 189
Figure 5.2 Elapsed time for a foot race is the same for all observers, but at relativistic speeds,
elapsed time depends on the motion of the observer relative to the location where the process
being timed occurs. (credit: "Jason Edward Scott Bain"/Flickr)
Considerhowwemeasureelapsedtime.Ifweuseastopwatch,forexample,howdoweknowwhentostartandstopthe
watch?Onemethodistousethearrivaloflightfromtheevent.Forexample,ifyou’reinamovingcarandobservethelight
arrivingfromatrafficsignalchangefromgreentored,youknowit’stimetosteponthebrakepedal.Thetimingismore
accurate if some sort of electronic detection is used, avoiding human reaction times and other complications.
Now suppose two observers use this method to measure the time interval between two flashes of light from flash lamps
thatareadistanceapart(Figure5.3).AnobserverAisseatedmidwayonarailcarwithtwoflashlampsatoppositesides
equidistant fromher.Apulse oflight isemitted fromeach flash lamp andmoves toward observer A,showninframe (a)
ofthefigure.Therailcarismovingrapidlyinthedirectionindicatedbythevelocityvectorinthediagram.AnobserverB
standingontheplatformisfacingtherailcarasitpassesandobservesbothflashesoflightreachhimsimultaneously,as
showninframe(c).Hemeasuresthedistancesfromwherehesawthepulsesoriginate,findsthemequal,andconcludesthat
the pulses were emitted simultaneously.
However, because of Observer A’s motion, the pulse from the right of the railcar, from the direction the car is moving,
reachesherbeforethepulsefromtheleft,asshowninframe(b).Shealsomeasuresthedistancesfromwithinherframeof
reference, finds them equal, and concludes that the pulses were not emitted simultaneously.
The two observers reach conflicting conclusions about whether the two events at well-separated locations were
simultaneous.Bothframesofreferencearevalid,andbothconclusionsarevalid.Whethertwoeventsatseparatelocations
are simultaneous depends on the motion of the observer relative to the locations of the events.