# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 678-684
############################################################

666 14 • Fluid Mechanics
where is absolute pressure, is gauge pressure, and is atmospheric pressure.
For example, if a tire gauge reads 34 psi, then the absolute pressure is 34 psi plus 14.7 psi ( in psi), or 48.7 psi
(equivalent to 336 kPa).
In most cases, the absolute pressure in fluids cannot be negative. Fluids push rather than pull, so the smallest
absolute pressure in a fluid is zero (a negative absolute pressure is a pull). Thus, the smallest possible gauge
pressure is (which makes zero). There is no theoretical limit to how large a gauge pressure can be.
Measuring Pressure
A host of devices are used for measuring pressure, ranging from tire gauges to blood pressure monitors. Many other
types of pressure gauges are commonly used to test the pressure of fluids, such as mechanical pressure gauges. We
will explore some of these in this section.
Any property that changes with pressure in a known way can be used to construct a pressure gauge. Some of the
most common types include strain gauges, which use the change in the shape of a material with pressure;
capacitance pressure gauges, which use the change in electric capacitance due to shape change with pressure;
piezoelectric pressure gauges, which generate a voltage difference across a piezoelectric material under a pressure
difference between the two sides; and ion gauges, which measure pressure by ionizing molecules in highly
evacuated chambers. Different pressure gauges are useful in different pressure ranges and under different physical
situations. Some examples are shown in Figure 14.11.
FIGURE 14.11 (a) Gauges are used to measure and monitor pressure in gas cylinders. Compressed gases are used in many industrial as
well as medical applications. (b) Tire pressure gauges come in many different models, but all are meant for the same purpose: to measure
the internal pressure of the tire. This enables the driver to keep the tires inflated at optimal pressure for load weight and driving conditions.
(c) An ionization gauge is a high-sensitivity device used to monitor the pressure of gases in an enclosed system. Neutral gas molecules are
ionized by the release of electrons, and the current is translated into a pressure reading. Ionization gauges are commonly used in industrial
applications that rely on vacuum systems.
Manometers
One of the most important classes of pressure gauges applies the property that pressure due to the weight of a fluid
of constant density is given by . The U-shaped tube shown in Figure 14.12 is an example of a manometer; in
part (a), both sides of the tube are open to the atmosphere, allowing atmospheric pressure to push down on each
side equally so that its effects cancel.
A manometer with only one side open to the atmosphere is an ideal device for measuring gauge pressures. The
gauge pressure is and is found by measuring h. For example, suppose one side of the U-tube is connected
to some source of pressure such as the balloon in part (b) of the figure or the vacuum-packed peanut jar shown
in part (c). Pressure is transmitted undiminished to the manometer, and the fluid levels are no longer equal. In part
(b), is greater than atmospheric pressure, whereas in part (c), is less than atmospheric pressure. In both
cases, differs from atmospheric pressure by an amount where is the density of the fluid in the
manometer. In part (b), can support a column of fluid of height h, so it must exert a pressure greater than
atmospheric pressure (the gauge pressure is positive). In part (c), atmospheric pressure can support a column of
fluid of height h, so is less than atmospheric pressure by an amount (the gauge pressure is negative).
Access for free at openstax.org

14.2 • Measuring Pressure 667
FIGURE 14.12 An open-tube manometer has one side open to the atmosphere. (a) Fluid depth must be the same on both sides, or the
pressure each side exerts at the bottom will be unequal and liquid will flow from the deeper side. (b) A positive gauge pressure
transmitted to one side of the manometer can support a column of fluid of height h. (c) Similarly, atmospheric pressure is greater than a
negative gauge pressure by an amount . The jar’s rigidity prevents atmospheric pressure from being transmitted to the peanuts.
Barometers
Manometers typically use a U-shaped tube of a fluid (often mercury) to measure pressure. A barometer (see Figure
14.13) is a device that typically uses a single column of mercury to measure atmospheric pressure. The barometer,
invented by the Italian mathematician and physicist Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) in 1643, is constructed from
a glass tube closed at one end and filled with mercury. The tube is then inverted and placed in a pool of mercury.
This device measures atmospheric pressure, rather than gauge pressure, because there is a nearly pure vacuum
above the mercury in the tube. The height of the mercury is such that . When atmospheric pressure
varies, the mercury rises or falls.
Weather forecasters closely monitor changes in atmospheric pressure (often reported as barometric pressure), as
rising mercury typically signals improving weather and falling mercury indicates deteriorating weather. The
barometer can also be used as an altimeter, since average atmospheric pressure varies with altitude. Mercury
barometers and manometers are so common that units of mm Hg are often quoted for atmospheric pressure and
blood pressures.
FIGURE 14.13 A mercury barometer measures atmospheric pressure. The pressure due to the mercury’s weight, , equals atmospheric
pressure. The atmosphere is able to force mercury in the tube to a height h because the pressure above the mercury is zero.

668 14 • Fluid Mechanics
EXAMPLE 14.2
Fluid Heights in an Open U-Tube
A U-tube with both ends open is filled with a liquid of density to a height h on both sides (Figure 14.14). A liquid
of density is poured into one side and Liquid 2 settles on top of Liquid 1. The heights on the two sides are
different. The height to the top of Liquid 2 from the interface is and the height to the top of Liquid 1 from the level
of the interface is . Derive a formula for the height difference.
FIGURE 14.14 Two liquids of different densities are shown in a U-tube.
Strategy
The pressure at points at the same height on the two sides of a U-tube must be the same as long as the two points
are in the same liquid. Therefore, we consider two points at the same level in the two arms of the tube: One point is
the interface on the side of the Liquid 2 and the other is a point in the arm with Liquid 1 that is at the same level as
the interface in the other arm. The pressure at each point is due to atmospheric pressure plus the weight of the
liquid above it.
Solution
Since the two points are in Liquid 1 and are at the same height, the pressure at the two points must be the same.
Therefore, we have
Hence,
This means that the difference in heights on the two sides of the U-tube is
The result makes sense if we set which gives If the two sides have the same density, they have
the same height.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.2
Mercury is a hazardous substance. Why do you suppose mercury is typically used in barometers instead of a safer
Access for free at openstax.org

14.3 • Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics 669
fluid such as water?
Units of pressure
As stated earlier, the SI unit for pressure is the pascal (Pa), where
In addition to the pascal, many other units for pressure are in common use (Table 14.3). In meteorology,
atmospheric pressure is often described in the unit of millibars (mbar), where
The millibar is a convenient unit for meteorologists because the average atmospheric pressure at sea level on Earth
is . Using the equations derived when considering pressure at a depth in a
fluid, pressure can also be measured as millimeters or inches of mercury. The pressure at the bottom of a 760-mm
column of mercury at in a container where the top part is evacuated is equal to the atmospheric pressure.
Thus, 760 mm Hg is also used in place of 1 atmosphere of pressure. In vacuum physics labs, scientists often use
another unit called the torr, named after Torricelli, who, as we have just seen, invented the mercury manometer for
measuring pressure. One torr is equal to a pressure of 1 mm Hg.
Unit Definition
SI unit: the Pascal
English unit: pounds per square inch ( or psi)
Other units of pressure
TABLE 14.3 Summary of the Units of Pressure
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Pascal’s principle
• Describe applications of Pascal’s principle
• Derive relationships between forces in a hydraulic system
In 1653, the French philosopher and scientist Blaise Pascal published his Treatise on the Equilibrium of Liquids, in
which he discussed principles of static fluids. A static fluid is a fluid that is not in motion. When a fluid is not flowing,
we say that the fluid is in static equilibrium. If the fluid is water, we say it is in hydrostatic equilibrium. For a fluid in
static equilibrium, the net force on any part of the fluid must be zero; otherwise the fluid will start to flow.
Pascal’s observations—since proven experimentally—provide the foundation for hydraulics, one of the most
important developments in modern mechanical technology. Pascal observed that a change in pressure applied to an
enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid and to the walls of its container. Because of this, we
often know more about pressure than other physical quantities in fluids. Moreover, Pascal’s principle implies that
the total pressure in a fluid is the sum of the pressures from different sources. A good example is the fluid at a depth

670 14 • Fluid Mechanics
depends on the depth of the fluid and the pressure of the atmosphere.
Pascal’s Principle
Pascal’s principle (also known as Pascal’s law) states that when a change in pressure is applied to an enclosed
fluid, it is transmitted undiminished to all portions of the fluid and to the walls of its container. In an enclosed fluid,
since atoms of the fluid are free to move about, they transmit pressure to all parts of the fluid and to the walls of the
container. Any change in pressure is transmitted undiminished.
Note that this principle does not say that the pressure is the same at all points of a fluid—which is not true, since the
pressure in a fluid near Earth varies with height. Rather, this principle applies to the change in pressure. Suppose
you place some water in a cylindrical container of height H and cross-sectional area A that has a movable piston of
mass m (Figure 14.15). Adding weight Mg at the top of the piston increases the pressure at the top by Mg/A, since
the additional weight also acts over area A of the lid:
FIGURE 14.15 Pressure in a fluid changes when the fluid is compressed. (a) The pressure at the top layer of the fluid is different from
pressure at the bottom layer. (b) The increase in pressure by adding weight to the piston is the same everywhere, for example,
.
According to Pascal’s principle, the pressure at all points in the water changes by the same amount, Mg/A. Thus, the
pressure at the bottom also increases by Mg/A. The pressure at the bottom of the container is equal to the sum of
the atmospheric pressure, the pressure due to the fluid, and the pressure supplied by the mass. The change in
pressure at the bottom of the container due to the mass is
Since the pressure changes are the same everywhere in the fluid, we no longer need subscripts to designate the
pressure change for top or bottom:
INTERACTIVE
Pascal’s Barrel is a great demonstration of Pascal’s principle. Watch a simulation (https://openstax.org/l/
21pascalbarrel) of Pascal’s 1646 experiment, in which he demonstrated the effects of changing pressure in a fluid.
Applications of Pascal’s Principle and Hydraulic Systems
Hydraulic systems are used to operate automotive brakes, hydraulic jacks, and numerous other mechanical systems
(Figure 14.16).
Access for free at openstax.org

14.3 • Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics 671
FIGURE 14.16 A typical hydraulic system with two fluid-filled cylinders, capped with pistons and connected by a tube called a hydraulic
line. A downward force on the left piston creates a change in pressure that is transmitted undiminished to all parts of the enclosed fluid.
This results in an upward force on the right piston that is larger than because the right piston has a larger surface area.
We can derive a relationship between the forces in this simple hydraulic system by applying Pascal’s principle. Note
first that the two pistons in the system are at the same height, so there is no difference in pressure due to a
difference in depth. The pressure due to acting on area is simply
According to Pascal’s principle, this pressure is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid and to all walls of the
container. Thus, a pressure is felt at the other piston that is equal to . That is, However,
since we see that
14.12
This equation relates the ratios of force to area in any hydraulic system, provided that the pistons are at the same
vertical height and that friction in the system is negligible.
Hydraulic systems can increase or decrease the force applied to them. To make the force larger, the pressure is
applied to a larger area. For example, if a 100-N force is applied to the left cylinder in Figure 14.16 and the right
cylinder has an area five times greater, then the output force is 500 N. Hydraulic systems are analogous to simple
levers, but they have the advantage that pressure can be sent through tortuously curved lines to several places at
once.
The hydraulic jack is such a hydraulic system. A hydraulic jack is used to lift heavy loads, such as the ones used by
auto mechanics to raise an automobile. It consists of an incompressible fluid in a U-tube fitted with a movable
piston on each side. One side of the U-tube is narrower than the other. A small force applied over a small area can
balance a much larger force on the other side over a larger area (Figure 14.17).