# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 594-599
############################################################

582 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
is a scalar quantity and does not have any particular direction; that is, pressure acts equally in all possible
directions. When you submerge your hand in water, you sense the same amount of pressure acting on the top
surface of your hand as on the bottom surface, or on the side surface, or on the surface of the skin between your
fingers. What you are perceiving in this case is an increase in pressure over what you are used to feeling when
your hand is not submerged in water. What you feel when your hand is not submerged in the water is the normal
pressure of one atmosphere, which serves as a reference point. The bulk stress is this increase in pressure, or
over the normal level,
When the bulk stress increases, the bulk strain increases in response, in accordance with Equation 12.33. The
proportionality constant in this relation is called the bulk modulus, B, or
12.39
The minus sign that appears in Equation 12.39 is for consistency, to ensure that B is a positive quantity. Note that
the minus sign is necessary because an increase in pressure (a positive quantity) always causes a decrease
in volume, and decrease in volume is a negative quantity. The reciprocal of the bulk modulus is called
compressibility or
12.40
The term ‘compressibility’ is used in relation to fluids (gases and liquids). Compressibility describes the change in
the volume of a fluid per unit increase in pressure. Fluids characterized by a large compressibility are relatively easy
to compress. For example, the compressibility of water is and the compressibility of acetone is
This means that under a 1.0-atm increase in pressure, the relative decrease in volume is
approximately three times as large for acetone as it is for water.
EXAMPLE 12.9
Hydraulic Press
In a hydraulic press Figure 12.23, a 250-liter volume of oil is subjected to a 2300-psi pressure increase. If the
compressibility of oil is find the bulk strain and the absolute decrease in the volume of oil when
the press is operating.
FIGURE 12.23 In a hydraulic press, when a small piston is displaced downward, the pressure in the oil is transmitted throughout the oil to
the large piston, causing the large piston to move upward. A small force applied to a small piston causes a large pressing force, which the
large piston exerts on an object that is either lifted or squeezed. The device acts as a mechanical lever.
Strategy
We must invert Equation 12.40 to find the bulk strain. First, we convert the pressure increase from psi to atm,
and identify
Access for free at openstax.org

12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 583
Solution
Substituting values into the equation, we have
Significance
Notice that since the compressibility of water is 2.32 times larger than that of oil, if the working substance in the
hydraulic press of this problem were changed to water, the bulk strain as well as the volume change would be 2.32
times larger.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.11
If the normal force acting on each face of a cubical piece of steel is changed by find the
resulting change in the volume of the piece of steel.
Shear Stress, Strain, and Modulus
The concepts of shear stress and strain concern only solid objects or materials. Buildings and tectonic plates are
examples of objects that may be subjected to shear stresses. In general, these concepts do not apply to fluids.
Shear deformation occurs when two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude are applied tangentially to opposite
surfaces of a solid object, causing no deformation in the transverse direction to the line of force, as in the typical
example of shear stress illustrated in Figure 12.24. Shear deformation is characterized by a gradual shift of
layers in the direction tangent to the acting forces. This gradation in occurs in the transverse direction along
some distance Shear strain is defined by the ratio of the largest displacement to the transverse distance
12.41
Shear strain is caused by shear stress. Shear stress is due to forces that act parallel to the surface. We use the
symbol for such forces. The magnitude per surface area A where shearing force is applied is the measure of
shear stress
12.42
The shear modulus is the proportionality constant in Equation 12.33 and is defined by the ratio of stress to strain.
Shear modulus is commonly denoted by S:
12.43

584 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.24 An object under shear stress: Two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude are applied tangentially to opposite parallel
surfaces of the object. The dashed-line contour depicts the resulting deformation. There is no change in the direction transverse to the
acting forces and the transverse length is unaffected. Shear deformation is characterized by a gradual shift of layers in the direction
tangent to the forces.
EXAMPLE 12.10
An Old Bookshelf
A cleaning person tries to move a heavy, old bookcase on a carpeted floor by pushing tangentially on the surface of
the very top shelf. However, the only noticeable effect of this effort is similar to that seen in Figure 12.24, and it
disappears when the person stops pushing. The bookcase is 180.0 cm tall and 90.0 cm wide with four 30.0-cm-
deep shelves, all partially loaded with books. The total weight of the bookcase and books is 600.0 N. If the person
gives the top shelf a 50.0-N push that displaces the top shelf horizontally by 15.0 cm relative to the motionless
bottom shelf, find the shear modulus of the bookcase.
Strategy
The only pieces of relevant information are the physical dimensions of the bookcase, the value of the tangential
force, and the displacement this force causes. We identify and
and we use Equation 12.43 to compute the shear modulus.
Solution
Substituting numbers into the equations, we obtain for the shear modulus
We can also find shear stress and strain, respectively:
Significance
If the person in this example gave the shelf a healthy push, it might happen that the induced shear would collapse it
to a pile of rubbish. Much the same shear mechanism is responsible for failures of earth-filled dams and levees; and,
in general, for landslides.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.12
Explain why the concepts of Young’s modulus and shear modulus do not apply to fluids.
Access for free at openstax.org

12.4 • Elasticity and Plasticity 585
12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the limit where a deformation of material is elastic
• Describe the range where materials show plastic behavior
• Analyze elasticity and plasticity on a stress-strain diagram
We referred to the proportionality constant between stress and strain as the elastic modulus. But why do we call it
that? What does it mean for an object to be elastic and how do we describe its behavior?
Elasticity is the tendency of solid objects and materials to return to their original shape after the external forces
(load) causing a deformation are removed. An object is elastic when it comes back to its original size and shape
when the load is no longer present. Physical reasons for elastic behavior vary among materials and depend on the
microscopic structure of the material. For example, the elasticity of polymers and rubbers is caused by stretching
polymer chains under an applied force. In contrast, the elasticity of metals is caused by resizing and reshaping the
crystalline cells of the lattices (which are the material structures of metals) under the action of externally applied
forces.
The two parameters that determine the elasticity of a material are its elastic modulus and its elastic limit. A high
elastic modulus is typical for materials that are hard to deform; in other words, materials that require a high load to
achieve a significant strain. An example is a steel band. A low elastic modulus is typical for materials that are easily
deformed under a load; for example, a rubber band. If the stress under a load becomes too high, then when the load
is removed, the material no longer comes back to its original shape and size, but relaxes to a different shape and
size: The material becomes permanently deformed. The elastic limit is the stress value beyond which the material
no longer behaves elastically but becomes permanently deformed.
Our perception of an elastic material depends on both its elastic limit and its elastic modulus. For example, all
rubbers are characterized by a low elastic modulus and a high elastic limit; hence, it is easy to stretch them and the
stretch is noticeably large. Among materials with identical elastic limits, the most elastic is the one with the lowest
elastic modulus.
When the load increases from zero, the resulting stress is in direct proportion to strain in the way given by Equation
12.33, but only when stress does not exceed some limiting value. For stress values within this linear limit, we can
describe elastic behavior in analogy with Hooke’s law for a spring. According to Hooke’s law, the stretch value of a
spring under an applied force is directly proportional to the magnitude of the force. Conversely, the response force
from the spring to an applied stretch is directly proportional to the stretch. In the same way, the deformation of a
material under a load is directly proportional to the load, and, conversely, the resulting stress is directly proportional
to strain. The linearity limit (or the proportionality limit) is the largest stress value beyond which stress is no longer
proportional to strain. Beyond the linearity limit, the relation between stress and strain is no longer linear. When
stress becomes larger than the linearity limit but still within the elasticity limit, behavior is still elastic, but the
relation between stress and strain becomes nonlinear.
For stresses beyond the elastic limit, a material exhibits plastic behavior. This means the material deforms
irreversibly and does not return to its original shape and size, even when the load is removed. When stress is
gradually increased beyond the elastic limit, the material undergoes plastic deformation. Rubber-like materials
show an increase in stress with the increasing strain, which means they become more difficult to stretch and,
eventually, they reach a fracture point where they break. Ductile materials such as metals show a gradual decrease
in stress with the increasing strain, which means they become easier to deform as stress-strain values approach the
breaking point. Microscopic mechanisms responsible for plasticity of materials are different for different materials.
We can graph the relationship between stress and strain on a stress-strain diagram. Each material has its own
characteristic strain-stress curve. A typical stress-strain diagram for a ductile metal under a load is shown in Figure
12.25. In this figure, strain is a fractional elongation (not drawn to scale). When the load is gradually increased, the
linear behavior (red line) that starts at the no-load point (the origin) ends at the linearity limit at point H. For further
load increases beyond point H, the stress-strain relation is nonlinear but still elastic. In the figure, this nonlinear
region is seen between points H and E. Ever larger loads take the stress to the elasticity limit E, where elastic

586 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
behavior ends and plastic deformation begins. Beyond the elasticity limit, when the load is removed, for example at
P, the material relaxes to a new shape and size along the green line. This is to say that the material becomes
permanently deformed and does not come back to its initial shape and size when stress becomes zero.
The material undergoes plastic deformation for loads large enough to cause stress to go beyond the elasticity limit
at E. The material continues to be plastically deformed until the stress reaches the fracture point (breaking point).
Beyond the fracture point, we no longer have one sample of material, so the diagram ends at the fracture point. For
the completeness of this qualitative description, it should be said that the linear, elastic, and plasticity limits denote
a range of values rather than one sharp point.
FIGURE 12.25 Typical stress-strain plot for a metal under a load: The graph ends at the fracture point. The arrows show the direction of
changes under an ever-increasing load. Points H and E are the linearity and elasticity limits, respectively. Between points H and E, the
behavior is nonlinear. The green line originating at P illustrates the metal’s response when the load is removed. The permanent deformation
has a strain value at the point where the green line intercepts the horizontal axis.
The value of stress at the fracture point is called breaking stress (or ultimate stress). Materials with similar elastic
properties, such as two metals, may have very different breaking stresses. For example, ultimate stress for
aluminum is and for steel it may be as high as depending on the kind of steel. We can
make a quick estimate, based on Equation 12.34, that for rods with a cross-sectional area, the breaking load
for an aluminum rod is and the breaking load for a steel rod is about nine times larger.
Access for free at openstax.org