# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 77-85
############################################################

2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 65
resultant displacement vectors and resultant velocity vectors, in mechanics to find resultant force vectors and the
resultants of many derived vector quantities, and in electricity and magnetism to find resultant electric or magnetic
vector fields.
EXAMPLE 2.9
Analytical Computation of a Resultant
Three displacement vectors , , and in a plane (Figure 2.13) are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.0, B = 7.0,
and C = 8.0, respectively, and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction ,
and . The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Resolve the vectors to their scalar components
and find the following vector sums: (a) , (b) , and (c) .
Strategy
First, we use Equation 2.17 to find the scalar components of each vector and then we express each vector in its
vector component form given by Equation 2.12. Then, we use analytical methods of vector algebra to find the
resultants.
Solution
We resolve the given vectors to their scalar components:
For (a) we may substitute directly into Equation 2.25 to find the scalar components of the resultant:
Therefore, the resultant vector is .
For (b), we may want to write the vector difference as
Then, the scalar components of the vector difference are
Hence, the difference vector is .
For (c), we can write vector in the following explicit form:
Then, the scalar components of are
The vector is .

66 2 • Vectors
Significance
Having found the vector components, we can illustrate the vectors by graphing or we can compute magnitudes and
direction angles, as shown in Figure 2.24. Results for the magnitudes in (b) and (c) can be compared with results for
the same problems obtained with the graphical method, shown in Figure 2.14 and Figure 2.15. Notice that the
analytical method produces exact results and its accuracy is not limited by the resolution of a ruler or a protractor,
as it was with the graphical method used in Example 2.2 for finding this same resultant.
FIGURE 2.24 Graphical illustration of the solutions obtained analytically in Example 2.9.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.8
Three displacement vectors , , and (Figure 2.13) are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.00, B = 7.00, and F =
20.00, respectively, and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction , , and
. The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Use the analytical method to find vector
. Verify that
G = 28.15 cm and that .
EXAMPLE 2.10
The Tug-of-War Game
Four dogs named Astro, Balto, Clifford, and Dug play a tug-of-war game with a toy (Figure 2.25). Astro pulls on the
toy in direction south of east, Balto pulls in direction east of north, and Clifford pulls in direction
west of north. Astro pulls strongly with 160.0 units of force (N), which we abbreviate as A = 160.0 N. Balto
pulls even stronger than Astro with a force of magnitude B = 200.0 N, and Clifford pulls with a force of magnitude C
= 140.0 N. When Dug pulls on the toy in such a way that his force balances out the resultant of the other three
forces, the toy does not move in any direction. With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on the toy
for this to happen?
Access for free at openstax.org

2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 67
FIGURE 2.25 Four dogs play a tug-of-war game with a toy.
Strategy
We assume that east is the direction of the positive x-axis and north is the direction of the positive y-axis. As in
Example 2.9, we have to resolve the three given forces— (the pull from Astro), (the pull from Balto), and (the
pull from Clifford)—into their scalar components and then find the scalar components of the resultant vector
. When the pulling force from Dug balances out this resultant, the sum of and must give the
null vector . This means that , so the pull from Dug must be antiparallel to .
Solution
The direction angles are , , and , and substituting them
into Equation 2.17 gives the scalar components of the three given forces:
Now we compute scalar components of the resultant vector :
The antiparallel vector to the resultant is
The magnitude of Dug’s pulling force is
The direction of Dug’s pulling force is
Dug pulls in the direction south of west because both components are negative, which means the pull vector

68 2 • Vectors
lies in the third quadrant (Figure 2.19).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.9
Suppose that Balto in Example 2.10 leaves the game to attend to more important matters, but Astro, Clifford, and
Dug continue playing. Astro and Clifford's pull on the toy does not change, but Dug runs around and bites on the toy
in a different place. With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on the toy now to balance out the
combined pulls from Clifford and Astro? Illustrate this situation by drawing a vector diagram indicating all forces
involved.
EXAMPLE 2.11
Vector Algebra
Find the magnitude of the vector that satisfies the equation , where and
.
Strategy
We first solve the given equation for the unknown vector . Then we substitute and ; group the terms along
each of the three directions , , and ; and identify the scalar components , , and . Finally, we substitute
into Equation 2.21 to find magnitude C.
Solution
The components are , , and , and substituting into Equation 2.21 gives
EXAMPLE 2.12
Displacement of a Skier
Starting at a ski lodge, a cross-country skier goes 5.0 km north, then 3.0 km west, and finally 4.0 km southwest
before taking a rest. Find their total displacement vector relative to the lodge when they are at the rest point. How
far and in what direction must they ski from the rest point to return directly to the lodge?
Strategy
We assume a rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the ski lodge and with the unit vector pointing east
and the unit vector pointing north. There are three displacements: , , and . We identify their magnitudes
as , , and . We identify their directions are the angles , ,
and . We resolve each displacement vector to its scalar components and substitute the
Access for free at openstax.org

2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 69
components into Equation 2.25 to obtain the scalar components of the resultant displacement from the lodge to
the rest point. On the way back from the rest point to the lodge, the displacement is . Finally, we find the
magnitude and direction of .
Solution
Scalar components of the displacement vectors are
Scalar components of the net displacement vector are
Hence, the skier’s net displacement vector is . On the way back to the lodge,
their displacement is . Its magnitude is
and its direction angle is .
Therefore, to return to the lodge, they must go 6.2 km in a direction about south of east.
Significance
Notice that no figure is needed to solve this problem by the analytical method. Figures are required when using a
graphical method; however, we can check if our solution makes sense by sketching it, which is a useful final step in
solving any vector problem.
EXAMPLE 2.13
Displacement of a Jogger
A jogger runs up a flight of 200 identical steps to the top of a hill and then runs along the top of the hill 50.0 m
before he stops at a drinking fountain (Figure 2.26). His displacement vector from point A at the bottom of the steps
to point B at the fountain is . What is the height and width of each step in the flight?
What is the actual distance the jogger covers? If he makes a loop and returns to point A, what is his net
displacement vector?

70 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.26 A jogger runs up a flight of steps.
Strategy
The displacement vector is the vector sum of the jogger’s displacement vector along the stairs (from
point A at the bottom of the stairs to point T at the top of the stairs) and his displacement vector on the top of
the hill (from point T at the top of the stairs to the fountain at point B). We must find the horizontal and the vertical
components of . If each step has width w and height h, the horizontal component of must have a length of
200w and the vertical component must have a length of 200h. The actual distance the jogger covers is the sum of
the distance he runs up the stairs and the distance of 50.0 m that he runs along the top of the hill.
Solution
In the coordinate system indicated in Figure 2.26, the jogger’s displacement vector on the top of the hill is
. His net displacement vector is
Therefore, his displacement vector along the stairs is
Its scalar components are and . Therefore, we must have
Hence, the step width is w = 40.0 m/200 = 0.2 m = 20 cm, and the step height is h = 30.0 m/200 = 0.15 m = 15 cm.
The distance that the jogger covers along the stairs is
Thus, the actual distance he runs is . When he makes a loop and comes
back from the fountain to his initial position at point A, the total distance he covers is twice this distance, or 200.0
m. However, his net displacement vector is zero, because when his final position is the same as his initial position,
the scalar components of his net displacement vector are zero (Equation 2.13).
In many physical situations, we often need to know the direction of a vector. For example, we may want to know the
direction of a magnetic field vector at some point or the direction of motion of an object. We have already said
direction is given by a unit vector, which is a dimensionless entity—that is, it has no physical units associated with it.
When the vector in question lies along one of the axes in a Cartesian system of coordinates, the answer is simple,
because then its unit vector of direction is either parallel or antiparallel to the direction of the unit vector of an axis.
For example, the direction of vector is unit vector . The general rule of finding the unit vector of
Access for free at openstax.org

2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 71
direction for any vector is to divide it by its magnitude V:
2.26
We see from this expression that the unit vector of direction is indeed dimensionless because the numerator and the
denominator in Equation 2.26 have the same physical unit. In this way, Equation 2.26 allows us to express the unit
vector of direction in terms of unit vectors of the axes. The following example illustrates this principle.
EXAMPLE 2.14
The Unit Vector of Direction
If the velocity vector of the military convoy in Example 2.8 is , what is the unit
vector of its direction of motion?
Strategy
The unit vector of the convoy’s direction of motion is the unit vector that is parallel to the velocity vector. The unit
vector is obtained by dividing a vector by its magnitude, in accordance with Equation 2.26.
Solution
The magnitude of the vector is
To obtain the unit vector , divide by its magnitude:
Significance
Note that when using the analytical method with a calculator, it is advisable to carry out your calculations to at least
three decimal places and then round off the final answer to the required number of significant figures, which is the
way we performed calculations in this example. If you round off your partial answer too early, you risk your final
answer having a huge numerical error, and it may be far off from the exact answer or from a value measured in an
experiment.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.10
Verify that vector obtained in Example 2.14 is indeed a unit vector by computing its magnitude. If the convoy in
Example 2.8 was moving across a desert flatland—that is, if the third component of its velocity was zero—what is the
unit vector of its direction of motion? Which geographic direction does it represent?

72 2 • Vectors
2.4 Products of Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between the scalar product and the vector product of two vectors.
• Determine the scalar product of two vectors.
• Determine the vector product of two vectors.
• Describe how the products of vectors are used in physics.
A vector can be multiplied by another vector but may not be divided by another vector. There are two kinds of
products of vectors used broadly in physics and engineering. One kind of multiplication is a scalar multiplication of
two vectors. Taking a scalar product of two vectors results in a number (a scalar), as its name indicates. Scalar
products are used to define work and energy relations. For example, the work that a force (a vector) performs on an
object while causing its displacement (a vector) is defined as a scalar product of the force vector with the
displacement vector. A quite different kind of multiplication is a vector multiplication of vectors. Taking a vector
product of two vectors returns as a result a vector, as its name suggests. Vector products are used to define other
derived vector quantities. For example, in describing rotations, a vector quantity called torque is defined as a vector
product of an applied force (a vector) and its distance from pivot to force (a vector). It is important to distinguish
between these two kinds of vector multiplications because the scalar product is a scalar quantity and a vector
product is a vector quantity.
The Scalar Product of Two Vectors (the Dot Product)
Scalar multiplication of two vectors yields a scalar product.
SCALAR PRODUCT (DOT PRODUCT)
The scalar product of two vectors and is a number defined by the equation
2.27
where is the angle between the vectors (shown in Figure 2.27). The scalar product is also called the dot
product because of the dot notation that indicates it.
In the definition of the dot product, the direction of angle does not matter, and can be measured from either of
the two vectors to the other because . The dot product is a negative number when
and is a positive number when . Moreover, the dot product of two parallel vectors is
, and the dot product of two antiparallel vectors is . The
scalar product of two orthogonal vectors vanishes: . The scalar product of a vector with
itself is the square of its magnitude:
2.28
FIGURE 2.27 The scalar product of two vectors. (a) The angle between the two vectors. (b) The orthogonal projection of vector onto
Access for free at openstax.org