# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 43-47
############################################################

1.7 • Solving Problems in Physics 31
to apply broad physical principles—usually represented by equations—to specific situations is a very powerful form
of knowledge. It is much more powerful than memorizing a list of facts. Analytical skills and problem-solving
abilities can be applied to new situations whereas a list of facts cannot be made long enough to contain every
possible circumstance. Such analytical skills are useful both for solving problems in this text and for applying
physics in everyday life.
As you are probably well aware, a certain amount of creativity and insight is required to solve problems. No rigid
procedure works every time. Creativity and insight grow with experience. With practice, the basics of problem
solving become almost automatic. One way to get practice is to work out the text’s examples for yourself as you
read. Another is to work as many end-of-section problems as possible, starting with the easiest to build confidence
and then progressing to the more difficult. After you become involved in physics, you will see it all around you, and
you can begin to apply it to situations you encounter outside the classroom, just as is done in many of the
applications in this text.
Although there is no simple step-by-step method that works for every problem, the following three-stage process
facilitates problem solving and makes it more meaningful. The three stages are strategy, solution, and significance.
This process is used in examples throughout the book. Here, we look at each stage of the process in turn.
Strategy
Strategy is the beginning stage of solving a problem. The idea is to figure out exactly what the problem is and then
develop a strategy for solving it. Some general advice for this stage is as follows:
• Examine the situation to determine which physical principles are involved. It often helps to draw a simple
sketch at the outset. You often need to decide which direction is positive and note that on your sketch. When
you have identified the physical principles, it is much easier to find and apply the equations representing those
principles. Although finding the correct equation is essential, keep in mind that equations represent physical
principles, laws of nature, and relationships among physical quantities. Without a conceptual understanding of
a problem, a numerical solution is meaningless.
• Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the “knowns”). Many
problems are stated very succinctly and require some inspection to determine what is known. Drawing a
sketch can be very useful at this point as well. Formally identifying the knowns is of particular importance in
applying physics to real-world situations. For example, the word stopped means the velocity is zero at that
instant. Also, we can often take initial time and position as zero by the appropriate choice of coordinate
system.
• Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). In complex problems,
especially, it is not always obvious what needs to be found or in what sequence. Making a list can help identify
the unknowns.
• Determine which physical principles can help you solve the problem. Since physical principles tend to be
expressed in the form of mathematical equations, a list of knowns and unknowns can help here. It is easiest if
you can find equations that contain only one unknown—that is, all the other variables are known—so you can
solve for the unknown easily. If the equation contains more than one unknown, then additional equations are
needed to solve the problem. In some problems, several unknowns must be determined to get at the one
needed most. In such problems it is especially important to keep physical principles in mind to avoid going
astray in a sea of equations. You may have to use two (or more) different equations to get the final answer.
Solution
The solution stage is when you do the math. Substitute the knowns (along with their units) into the appropriate
equation and obtain numerical solutions complete with units. That is, do the algebra, calculus, geometry, or
arithmetic necessary to find the unknown from the knowns, being sure to carry the units through the calculations.
This step is clearly important because it produces the numerical answer, along with its units. Notice, however, that
this stage is only one-third of the overall problem-solving process.
Significance
After having done the math in the solution stage of problem solving, it is tempting to think you are done. But, always
remember that physics is not math. Rather, in doing physics, we use mathematics as a tool to help us understand

32 1 • Units and Measurement
nature. So, after you obtain a numerical answer, you should always assess its significance:
• Check your units. If the units of the answer are incorrect, then an error has been made and you should go back
over your previous steps to find it. One way to find the mistake is to check all the equations you derived for
dimensional consistency. However, be warned that correct units do not guarantee the numerical part of the
answer is also correct.
• Check the answer to see whether it is reasonable. Does it make sense? This step is extremely important: the
goal of physics is to describe nature accurately. To determine whether the answer is reasonable, check both
its magnitude and its sign, in addition to its units. The magnitude should be consistent with a rough estimate
of what it should be. It should also compare reasonably with magnitudes of other quantities of the same type.
The sign usually tells you about direction and should be consistent with your prior expectations. Your
judgment will improve as you solve more physics problems, and it will become possible for you to make finer
judgments regarding whether nature is described adequately by the answer to a problem. This step brings the
problem back to its conceptual meaning. If you can judge whether the answer is reasonable, you have a
deeper understanding of physics than just being able to solve a problem mechanically.
• Check to see whether the answer tells you something interesting. What does it mean? This is the flip side of
the question: Does it make sense? Ultimately, physics is about understanding nature, and we solve physics
problems to learn a little something about how nature operates. Therefore, assuming the answer does make
sense, you should always take a moment to see if it tells you something about the world that you find
interesting. Even if the answer to this particular problem is not very interesting to you, what about the method
you used to solve it? Could the method be adapted to answer a question that you do find interesting? In many
ways, it is in answering questions such as these that science progresses.
Access for free at openstax.org

1 • Chapter Review 33
Chapter Review
Key Terms
accuracy the degree to which a measured value law description, using concise language or a
agrees with an accepted reference value for that mathematical formula, of a generalized pattern in
measurement nature supported by scientific evidence and
base quantity physical quantity chosen by repeated experiments
convention and practical considerations such that meter SI unit for length, abbreviated m
all other physical quantities can be expressed as method of adding percents the percent uncertainty
algebraic combinations of them in a quantity calculated by multiplication or division
base unit standard for expressing the measurement is the sum of the percent uncertainties in the items
of a base quantity within a particular system of used to make the calculation.
units; defined by a particular procedure used to metric system system in which values can be
measure the corresponding base quantity calculated in factors of 10
conversion factor a ratio that expresses how many of model representation of something often too difficult
one unit are equal to another unit (or impossible) to display directly
derived quantity physical quantity defined using order of magnitude the size of a quantity as it relates
algebraic combinations of base quantities to a power of 10
derived units units that can be calculated using percent uncertainty the ratio of the uncertainty of a
algebraic combinations of the fundamental units measurement to the measured value, expressed as
dimension expression of the dependence of a a percentage
physical quantity on the base quantities as a physical quantity characteristic or property of an
product of powers of symbols representing the base object that can be measured or calculated from
quantities; in general, the dimension of a quantity other measurements
has the form for some powers a, physics science concerned with describing the
b, c, d, e, f, and g. interactions of energy, matter, space, and time;
dimensionally consistent equation in which every especially interested in what fundamental
term has the same dimensions and the arguments mechanisms underlie every phenomenon
of any mathematical functions appearing in the precision the degree to which repeated
equation are dimensionless measurements agree with each other
dimensionless quantity with a dimension of second the SI unit for time, abbreviated s
also called quantity of SI units the international system of units that
dimension 1 or a pure number scientists in most countries have agreed to use;
discrepancy the difference between the measured includes units such as meters, liters, and grams
value and a given standard or expected value significant figures used to express the precision of a
English units system of measurement used in the measuring tool used to measure a value
United States; includes units of measure such as theory testable explanation for patterns in nature
feet, gallons, and pounds supported by scientific evidence and verified
estimation using prior experience and sound physical multiple times by various groups of researchers
reasoning to arrive at a rough idea of a quantity’s uncertainty a quantitative measure of how much
value; sometimes called an “order-of-magnitude measured values deviate from one another
approximation,” a “guesstimate,” a “back-of-the- units standards used for expressing and comparing
envelope calculation”, or a “Fermi calculation” measurements
kilogram SI unit for mass, abbreviated kg
Key Equations
Percent uncertainty
Summary
1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics • Physics operates on a vast range of scales of
length, mass, and time. Scientists use the
• Physics is about trying to find the simple laws
concept of the order of magnitude of a number to
that describe all natural phenomena.

34 1 • Chapter Review
track which phenomena occur on which scales. value of a physical quantity based on prior
They also use orders of magnitude to compare experience and sound physical reasoning. Some
the various scales. strategies that may help when making an
• Scientists attempt to describe the world by estimate are as follows:
formulating models, theories, and laws. ◦ Get big lengths from smaller lengths.
◦ Get areas and volumes from lengths.
1.2 Units and Standards
◦ Get masses from volumes and densities.
• Systems of units are built up from a small ◦ If all else fails, bound it.
number of base units, which are defined by ◦ One “sig. fig.” is fine.
accurate and precise measurements of ◦ Ask yourself: Does this make any sense?
conventionally chosen base quantities. Other
1.6 Significant Figures
units are then derived as algebraic combinations
of the base units. • Accuracy of a measured value refers to how close
• Two commonly used systems of units are English a measurement is to an accepted reference
units and SI units. All scientists and most of the value. The discrepancy in a measurement is the
other people in the world use SI, whereas amount by which the measurement result differs
nonscientists in the United States still tend to from this value.
use English units. • Precision of measured values refers to how close
• The SI base units of length, mass, and time are the agreement is between repeated
the meter (m), kilogram (kg), and second (s), measurements. The uncertainty of a
respectively. measurement is a quantification of this.
• SI units are a metric system of units, meaning • The precision of a measuring tool is related to the
values can be calculated by factors of 10. Metric size of its measurement increments. The smaller
prefixes may be used with metric units to scale the measurement increment, the more precise
the base units to sizes appropriate for almost any the tool.
application. • Significant figures express the precision of a
measuring tool.
1.3 Unit Conversion
• When multiplying or dividing measured values,
• To convert a quantity from one unit to another, the final answer can contain only as many
multiply by conversion factors in such a way that significant figures as the value with the least
you cancel the units you want to get rid of and number of significant figures.
introduce the units you want to end up with. • When adding or subtracting measured values,
• Be careful with areas and volumes. Units obey the final answer cannot contain more decimal
the rules of algebra so, for example, if a unit is places than the least-precise value.
squared we need two factors to cancel it.
1.7 Solving Problems in Physics
1.4 Dimensional Analysis
The three stages of the process for solving physics
• The dimension of a physical quantity is just an problems used in this book are as follows:
expression of the base quantities from which it is
• Strategy: Determine which physical principles
derived.
are involved and develop a strategy for using
• All equations expressing physical laws or
them to solve the problem.
principles must be dimensionally consistent. This
• Solution: Do the math necessary to obtain a
fact can be used as an aid in remembering
numerical solution complete with units.
physical laws, as a way to check whether claimed
• Significance: Check the solution to make sure it
relationships between physical quantities are
makes sense (correct units, reasonable
possible, and even to derive new physical laws.
magnitude and sign) and assess its significance.
1.5 Estimates and Fermi Calculations
• An estimate is a rough educated guess at the
Access for free at openstax.org