# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 403-410
############################################################

9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 391
Significance
Using Newton's Second Law, this force causes an acceleration of . This is 130,000 times gravity,
which is unimaginably huge. It goes almost without saying that such a force would kill everyone on board instantly,
as well as destroying every piece of equipment. Fortunately, the Enterprise has “inertial dampeners.” It is left as an
exercise for the reader’s imagination to determine how these work.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.1
The U.S. Air Force uses “10gs” (an acceleration equal to ) as the maximum acceleration a human can
withstand (but only for several seconds) and survive. How much time must the Enterprise spend accelerating if the
humans on board are to experience an average of at most 10gs of acceleration? (Assume the inertial dampeners are
offline.)
EXAMPLE 9.4
The iPhone Drop
Apple released its iPhone 6 Plus in November 2014. According to many reports, it was originally supposed to have a
screen made from sapphire, but that was changed at the last minute for a hardened glass screen. Reportedly, this
was because the sapphire screen cracked when the phone was dropped. What force did the iPhone 6 Plus
experience as a result of being dropped?
Strategy
The force the phone experiences is due to the impulse applied to it by the floor when the phone collides with the
floor. Our strategy then is to use the impulse-momentum relationship. We calculate the impulse, estimate the
impact time, and use this to calculate the force.
We need to make a couple of reasonable estimates, as well as find technical data on the phone itself. First, let’s
suppose that the phone is most often dropped from about chest height on an average-height person. Second,
assume that it is dropped from rest, that is, with an initial vertical velocity of zero. Finally, we assume that the phone
bounces very little—the height of its bounce is assumed to be negligible.
Solution
Define upward to be the +y-direction. A typical height is approximately and, as stated, . The
average force on the phone is related to the impulse the floor applies on it during the collision:
The impulse equals the change in momentum,
so
Next, the change of momentum is
We need to be careful with the velocities here; this is the change of velocity due to the collision with the floor. But
the phone also has an initial drop velocity [ ], so we label our velocities. Let:
• the initial velocity with which the phone was dropped (zero, in this example)

392 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
• the velocity the phone had the instant just before it hit the floor
• the final velocity of the phone as a result of hitting the floor
Figure 9.12 shows the velocities at each of these points in the phone’s trajectory.
FIGURE 9.12 (a) The initial velocity of the phone is zero, just after the person drops it. (b) Just before the phone hits the floor, its velocity is
which is unknown at the moment, except for its direction, which is downward (c) After bouncing off the floor, the phone has a
velocity , which is also unknown, except for its direction, which is upward
With these definitions, the change of momentum of the phone during the collision with the floor is
Since we assume the phone doesn’t bounce at all when it hits the floor (or at least, the bounce height is negligible),
then is zero, so
We can get the speed of the phone just before it hits the floor using either kinematics or conservation of energy.
We’ll use conservation of energy here; you should re-do this part of the problem using kinematics and prove that you
get the same answer.
First, define the zero of potential energy to be located at the floor. Conservation of energy then gives us:
Defining and using gives
Because is a vector magnitude, it must be positive. Thus, . Inserting this result into
the expression for force gives
Access for free at openstax.org

9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 393
Finally, we need to estimate the collision time. One common way to estimate a collision time is to calculate how long
the object would take to travel its own length. The phone is moving at 5.4 m/s just before it hits the floor, and it is
0.14 m long, giving an estimated collision time of 0.026 s. Inserting the given numbers, we obtain
Significance
The iPhone itself weighs just ; the force the floor applies to it is therefore over 20
times its weight.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.2
What if we had assumed the phone did bounce on impact? Would this have increased the force on the iPhone,
decreased it, or made no difference?
Momentum and Force
In Example 9.3, we obtained an important relationship:
9.8
In words, the average force applied to an object is equal to the change of the momentum that the force causes,
divided by the time interval over which this change of momentum occurs. This relationship is very useful in
situations where the collision time is small, but measureable; typical values would be 1/10th of a second, or
even one thousandth of a second. Car crashes, punting a football, or collisions of subatomic particles would meet
this criterion.
For a continuously changing momentum—due to a continuously changing force—this becomes a powerful
conceptual tool. In the limit , Equation 9.2 becomes
9.9
This says that the rate of change of the system’s momentum (implying that momentum is a function of time) is
exactly equal to the net applied force (also, in general, a function of time). This is, in fact, Newton’s second law,
written in terms of momentum rather than acceleration. This is the relationship Newton himself presented in his
Principia Mathematica (although he called it “quantity of motion” rather than “momentum”).
If the mass of the system remains constant, Equation 9.3 reduces to the more familiar form of Newton’s second law.
We can see this by substituting the definition of momentum:
The assumption of constant mass allowed us to pull m out of the derivative. If the mass is not constant, we cannot

394 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
use this form of the second law, but instead must start from Equation 9.3. Thus, one advantage to expressing force
in terms of changing momentum is that it allows for the mass of the system to change, as well as the velocity; this is
a concept we’ll explore when we study the motion of rockets.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION IN TERMS OF MOMENTUM
The net external force on a system is equal to the rate of change of the momentum of that system caused by the
force:
Although Equation 9.3 allows for changing mass, as we will see in Rocket Propulsion, the relationship between
momentum and force remains useful when the mass of the system is constant, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 9.5
Calculating Force: Venus Williams’ Tennis Serve
During the 2007 French Open, Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a premier women’s match, reaching a
speed of 58 m/s (209 km/h). What is the average force exerted on the 0.057-kg tennis ball by Venus Williams’
racquet? Assume that the ball’s speed just after impact is 58 m/s, as shown in Figure 9.13, that the initial horizontal
component of the velocity before impact is negligible, and that the ball remained in contact with the racquet for 5.0
ms.
FIGURE 9.13 The final velocity of the tennis ball is .
Strategy
This problem involves only one dimension because the ball starts from having no horizontal velocity component
before impact. Newton’s second law stated in terms of momentum is then written as
As noted above, when mass is constant, the change in momentum is given by
Access for free at openstax.org

9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 395
where we have used scalars because this problem involves only one dimension. In this example, the velocity just
after impact and the time interval are given; thus, once is calculated, we can use to find the force.
Solution
To determine the change in momentum, insert the values for the initial and final velocities into the equation above:
Now the magnitude of the net external force can be determined by using
where we have retained only two significant figures in the final step.
Significance
This quantity was the average force exerted by Venus Williams’ racquet on the tennis ball during its brief impact
(note that the ball also experienced the 0.57-N force of gravity, but that force was not due to the racquet). This
problem could also be solved by first finding the acceleration and then using , but one additional step would
be required compared with the strategy used in this example.
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the meaning of “conservation of momentum”
• Correctly identify if a system is, or is not, closed
• Define a system whose momentum is conserved
• Mathematically express conservation of momentum for a given system
• Calculate an unknown quantity using conservation of momentum
Recall Newton’s third law: When two objects of masses and interact (meaning that they apply forces on each
other), the force that object 2 applies to object 1 is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that
object 1 applies on object 2. Let:
• the force on from
• the force on from
Then, in symbols, Newton’s third law says
9.10
(Recall that these two forces do not cancel because they are applied to different objects. causes to
accelerate, and causes to accelerate.)
Although the magnitudes of the forces on the objects are the same, the accelerations are not, simply because the
masses (in general) are different. Therefore, the changes in velocity of each object are different:
However, the products of the mass and the change of velocity are equal (in magnitude):

396 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
9.11
It’s a good idea, at this point, to make sure you’re clear on the physical meaning of the derivatives in Equation 9.3.
Because of the interaction, each object ends up getting its velocity changed, by an amount dv. Furthermore, the
interaction occurs over a time interval dt, which means that the change of velocities also occurs over dt. This time
interval is the same for each object.
Let‘s assume, for the moment, that the masses of the objects do not change during the interaction. (We’ll relax this
restriction later.) In that case, we can pull the masses inside the derivatives:
9.12
and thus
9.13
This says that the rate at which momentum changes is the same for both objects. The masses are different, and the
changes of velocity are different, but the rate of change of the product of m and are the same.
Physically, this means that during the interaction of the two objects ( ), both objects have their
momentum changed; but those changes are identical in magnitude, though opposite in sign. For example, the
momentum of object 1 might increase, which means that the momentum of object 2 decreases by exactly the same
amount.
In light of this, let’s re-write Equation 9.12 in a more suggestive form:
9.14
This says that during the interaction, although object 1’s momentum changes, and object 2’s momentum also
changes, these two changes cancel each other out, so that the total change of momentum of the two objects
together is zero.
Since the total combined momentum of the two objects together never changes, then we could write
9.15
from which it follows that
9.16
As shown in Figure 9.14, the total momentum of the system before and after the collision remains the same.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 397
FIGURE 9.14 Before the collision, the two billiard balls travel with momenta and . The total momentum of the system is the sum of
these, as shown by the red vector labeled on the left. After the collision, the two billiard balls travel with different momenta and
. The total momentum, however, has not changed, as shown by the red vector arrow on the right.
Generalizing this result to N objects, we obtain
9.17
Equation 9.17 is the definition of the total (or net) momentum of a system of N interacting objects, along with the
statement that the total momentum of a system of objects is constant in time—or better, is conserved.
CONSERVATION LAWS
If the value of a physical quantity is constant in time, we say that the quantity is conserved.
Requirements for Momentum Conservation
There is a complication, however. A system must meet two requirements for its momentum to be conserved:
1. The mass of the system must remain constant during the interaction.
As the objects interact (apply forces on each other), they may transfer mass from one to another; but any
mass one object gains is balanced by the loss of that mass from another. The total mass of the system of
objects, therefore, remains unchanged as time passes:
2. The net external force on the system must be zero.
As the objects collide, or explode, and move around, they exert forces on each other. However, all of these
forces are internal to the system, and thus each of these internal forces is balanced by another internal force
that is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign. As a result, the change in momentum caused by each internal
force is cancelled by another momentum change that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
Therefore, internal forces cannot change the total momentum of a system because the changes sum to zero.
However, if there is some external force that acts on all of the objects (gravity, for example, or friction), then
this force changes the momentum of the system as a whole; that is to say, the momentum of the system is
changed by the external force. Thus, for the momentum of the system to be conserved, we must have