# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 491-499
############################################################

10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 479
figure. This is a convenient choice because we can then integrate along the x-axis.
FIGURE 10.25 Calculation of the moment of inertia I for a uniform thin rod about an axis through the center of the rod.
We define dm to be a small element of mass making up the rod. The moment of inertia integral is an integral over
the mass distribution. However, we know how to integrate over space, not over mass. We therefore need to find a
way to relate mass to spatial variables. We do this using the linear mass density of the object, which is the mass
per unit length. Since the mass density of this object is uniform, we can write
If we take the differential of each side of this equation, we find
since is constant. We chose to orient the rod along the x-axis for convenience—this is where that choice becomes
very helpful. Note that a piece of the rod dl lies completely along the x-axis and has a length dx; in fact, in
this situation. We can therefore write , giving us an integration variable that we know how to deal with.
The distance of each piece of mass dm from the axis is given by the variable x, as shown in the figure. Putting this all
together, we obtain
The last step is to be careful about our limits of integration. The rod extends from to , since the
axis is in the middle of the rod at . This gives us
Next, we calculate the moment of inertia for the same uniform thin rod but with a different axis choice so we can
compare the results. We would expect the moment of inertia to be smaller about an axis through the center of mass
than the endpoint axis, just as it was for the barbell example at the start of this section. This happens because more
mass is distributed farther from the axis of rotation.
A uniform thin rod with axis at the end
Now consider the same uniform thin rod of mass M and length L, but this time we move the axis of rotation to the
end of the rod. We wish to find the moment of inertia about this new axis (Figure 10.26). The quantity dm is again
defined to be a small element of mass making up the rod. Just as before, we obtain
However, this time we have different limits of integration. The rod extends from to , since the axis is at
the end of the rod at . Therefore we find

480 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.26 Calculation of the moment of inertia I for a uniform thin rod about an axis through the end of the rod.
Note the rotational inertia of the rod about its endpoint is larger than the rotational inertia about its center
(consistent with the barbell example) by a factor of four.
The Parallel-Axis Theorem
The similarity between the process of finding the moment of inertia of a rod about an axis through its middle and
about an axis through its end is striking, and suggests that there might be a simpler method for determining the
moment of inertia for a rod about any axis parallel to the axis through the center of mass. Such an axis is called a
parallel axis. There is a theorem for this, called the parallel-axis theorem, which we state here but do not derive in
this text.
PARALLEL-AXIS THEOREM
Let m be the mass of an object and let d be the distance from an axis through the object’s center of mass to a
new axis. Then we have
10.20
Let’s apply this to the rod examples solved above:
This result agrees with our more lengthy calculation from above. This is a useful equation that we apply in some of
the examples and problems.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.5
What is the moment of inertia of a cylinder of radius R and mass m about an axis through a point on the surface, as
shown below?
Access for free at openstax.org

10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 481
A uniform thin disk about an axis through the center
Integrating to find the moment of inertia of a two-dimensional object is a little bit trickier, but one shape is
commonly done at this level of study—a uniform thin disk about an axis through its center (Figure 10.27).
FIGURE 10.27 Calculating the moment of inertia for a thin disk about an axis through its center.
Since the disk is thin, we can take the mass as distributed entirely in the xy-plane. We again start with the
relationship for the surface mass density, which is the mass per unit surface area. Since it is uniform, the surface
mass density is constant:
Now we use a simplification for the area. The area can be thought of as made up of a series of thin rings, where each
ring is a mass increment dm of radius r equidistant from the axis, as shown in part (b) of the figure. The infinitesimal
area of each ring dA is therefore given by the length of each ring ( ) times the infinitesimal width of each ring dr:
The full area of the disk is then made up from adding all the thin rings with a radius range from 0 to R. This radius
range then becomes our limits of integration for dr, that is, we integrate from to . Putting this all
together, we have
Note that this agrees with the value given in Figure 10.20.
Calculating the moment of inertia for compound objects
Now consider a compound object such as that in Figure 10.28, which depicts a thin disk at the end of a thin rod. This
cannot be easily integrated to find the moment of inertia because it is not a uniformly shaped object. However, if we
go back to the initial definition of moment of inertia as a summation, we can reason that a compound object’s
moment of inertia can be found from the sum of each part of the object:
10.21
It is important to note that the moments of inertia of the objects in Equation 10.21 are about a common axis. In the
case of this object, that would be a rod of length L rotating about its end, and a thin disk of radius R rotating about an
axis shifted off of the center by a distance , where R is the radius of the disk. Let’s define the mass of the rod
to be and the mass of the disk to be

482 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.28 Compound object consisting of a disk at the end of a rod. The axis of rotation is located at A.
The moment of inertia of the rod is simply , but we have to use the parallel-axis theorem to find the moment
of inertia of the disk about the axis shown. The moment of inertia of the disk about its center is and we
apply the parallel-axis theorem to find
Adding the moment of inertia of the rod plus the moment of inertia of the disk with a shifted axis of rotation, we find
the moment of inertia for the compound object to be
Applying moment of inertia calculations to solve problems
Now let’s examine some practical applications of moment of inertia calculations.
EXAMPLE 10.11
Person on a Merry-Go-Round
A 25-kg child stands at a distance from the axis of a rotating merry-go-round (Figure 10.29). The merry-
go-round can be approximated as a uniform solid disk with a mass of 500 kg and a radius of 2.0 m. Find the moment
of inertia of this system.
FIGURE 10.29 Calculating the moment of inertia for a child on a merry-go-round.
Strategy
This problem involves the calculation of a moment of inertia. We are given the mass and distance to the axis of
rotation of the child as well as the mass and radius of the merry-go-round. Since the mass and size of the child are
much smaller than the merry-go-round, we can approximate the child as a point mass. The notation we use is
.
Our goal is to find .
Access for free at openstax.org

10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 483
Solution
For the child, , and for the merry-go-round, . Therefore
Significance
The value should be close to the moment of inertia of the merry-go-round by itself because it has much more mass
distributed away from the axis than the child does.
EXAMPLE 10.12
Rod and Solid Sphere
Find the moment of inertia of the rod and solid sphere combination about the two axes as shown below. The rod has
length 0.5 m and mass 2.0 kg. The radius of the sphere is 20.0 cm and has mass 1.0 kg.
Strategy
Since we have a compound object in both cases, we can use the parallel-axis theorem to find the moment of inertia
about each axis. In (a), the center of mass of the sphere is located at a distance from the axis of rotation. In
(b), the center of mass of the sphere is located a distance R from the axis of rotation. In both cases, the moment of
inertia of the rod is about an axis at one end. Refer to Table 10.4 for the moments of inertia for the individual
objects.
a. ;
;
b. ;
;
;
Significance
Using the parallel-axis theorem eases the computation of the moment of inertia of compound objects. We see that
the moment of inertia is greater in (a) than (b). This is because the axis of rotation is closer to the center of mass of
the system in (b). The simple analogy is that of a rod. The moment of inertia about one end is , but the
moment of inertia through the center of mass along its length is .

484 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
EXAMPLE 10.13
Angular Velocity of a Pendulum
A pendulum in the shape of a rod (Figure 10.30) is released from rest at an angle of . It has a length 30 cm and
mass 300 g. What is its angular velocity at its lowest point?
FIGURE 10.30 A pendulum in the form of a rod is released from rest at an angle of
Strategy
Use conservation of energy to solve the problem. At the point of release, the pendulum has gravitational potential
energy, which is determined from the height of the center of mass above its lowest point in the swing. At the bottom
of the swing, all of the gravitational potential energy is converted into rotational kinetic energy.
Solution
The change in potential energy is equal to the change in rotational kinetic energy, .
At the top of the swing: . At the bottom of the swing, with respect to the
lowest point the rod swings.
At the top of the swing, the rotational kinetic energy is . At the bottom of the swing, . Therefore:
or
Solving for , we have
Inserting numerical values, we have
Significance
Note that the angular velocity of the pendulum does not depend on its mass.
Access for free at openstax.org

10.6 • Torque 485
10.6 Torque
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how the magnitude of a torque depends on the magnitude of the lever arm and the angle the
force vector makes with the lever arm
• Determine the sign (positive or negative) of a torque using the right-hand rule
• Calculate individual torques about a common axis and sum them to find the net torque
An important quantity for describing the dynamics of a rotating rigid body is torque. We see the application of torque
in many ways in our world. We all have an intuition about torque, as when we use a large wrench to unscrew a
stubborn bolt. Torque is at work in unseen ways, as when we press on the accelerator in a car, causing the engine to
put additional torque on the drive train. Or every time we move our bodies from a standing position, we apply a
torque to our limbs. In this section, we define torque and make an argument for the equation for calculating torque
for a rigid body with fixed-axis rotation.
Defining Torque
So far we have defined many variables that are rotational equivalents to their translational counterparts. Let’s
consider what the counterpart to force must be. Since forces change the translational motion of objects, the
rotational counterpart must be related to changing the rotational motion of an object about an axis. We call this
rotational counterpart torque.
In everyday life, we rotate objects about an axis all the time, so intuitively we already know much about torque.
Consider, for example, how we rotate a door to open it. First, we know that a door opens slowly if we push too close
to its hinges; it is more efficient to rotate a door open if we push far from the hinges. Second, we know that we
should push perpendicular to the plane of the door; if we push parallel to the plane of the door, we are not able to
rotate it. Third, the larger the force, the more effective it is in opening the door; the harder you push, the more
rapidly the door opens. The first point implies that the farther the force is applied from the axis of rotation, the
greater the angular acceleration; the second implies that the effectiveness depends on the angle at which the force
is applied; the third implies that the magnitude of the force must also be part of the equation. Note that for rotation
in a plane, torque has two possible directions. Torque is either clockwise or counterclockwise relative to the chosen
pivot point. Figure 10.31 shows counterclockwise rotations.
FIGURE 10.31 Torque is the turning or twisting effectiveness of a force, illustrated here for door rotation on its hinges (as viewed from
overhead). Torque has both magnitude and direction. (a) A counterclockwise torque is produced by a force acting at a distance r from the
hinges (the pivot point). (b) A smaller counterclockwise torque is produced when a smaller force acts at the same distance r from the

486 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
hinges. (c) The same force as in (a) produces a smaller counterclockwise torque when applied at a smaller distance from the hinges. (d) A
smaller counterclockwise torque is produced by the same magnitude force as (a) acting at the same distance as (a) but at an angle that is
less than .
Now let’s consider how to define torques in the general three-dimensional case.
TORQUE
When a force is applied to a point P whose position is relative to O (Figure 10.32), the torque around O is
10.22
FIGURE 10.32 The torque is perpendicular to the plane defined by and its direction is determined by the right-hand rule.
From the definition of the cross product, the torque is perpendicular to the plane containing and has
magnitude
where is the angle between the vectors and . The SI unit of torque is newtons times meters, usually written as
. The quantity is the perpendicular distance from O to the line determined by the vector and is
called the lever arm. Note that the greater the lever arm, the greater the magnitude of the torque. In terms of the
lever arm, the magnitude of the torque is
10.23
The cross product also tells us the sign of the torque. In Figure 10.32, the cross product is along the
positive z-axis, which by convention is a positive torque. If is along the negative z-axis, this produces a
negative torque.
If we consider a disk that is free to rotate about an axis through the center, as shown in Figure 10.33, we can see
how the angle between the radius and the force affects the magnitude of the torque. If the angle is zero, the
torque is zero; if the angle is , the torque is maximum. The torque in Figure 10.33 is positive because the
Access for free at openstax.org