# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 19-26
############################################################

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 11
Solution
Rearranging the equation n=c/v forvgives us
c
v= n.
Theindexofrefractionforzirconisgivenas1.923inTable1.1,andcisgiveninEquation1.1.Enteringthese
values in the equation gives
8
v= 3.00×10 m/s =1.56×10 8 m/s.
1.923
Significance
Thisspeedisslightlylargerthanhalfthespeedoflightinavacuumandisstillhighcomparedwithspeedswe
normallyexperience.TheonlysubstancelistedinTable1.1thathasagreaterindexofrefractionthanzirconis
diamond.Weshallseelaterthatthelargeindexofrefractionforzirconmakesitsparklemorethanglass,butless
than diamond.
1.1 CheckYourUnderstandingTable1.1showsthatethanolandfreshwaterhaveverysimilarindicesof
refraction. By what percentage do the speeds of light in these liquids differ?
The Ray Model of Light
YouhavealreadystudiedsomeofthewavecharacteristicsoflightinthepreviouschapteronElectromagnetic Waves
(http://cnx.org/content/m58495/latest/) .Inthischapter,westartmainlywiththeraycharacteristics.Therearethree
waysinwhichlightcantravelfromasourcetoanotherlocation(Figure1.4).Itcancomedirectlyfromthesourcethrough
emptyspace,suchasfromtheSuntoEarth.Orlightcantravelthroughvariousmedia,suchasairandglass,totheobserver.
Light can also arrive after being reflected, such as by a mirror. In all of these cases, we can model the path of light as a
straight line called aray.
Figure 1.4 Three methods for light to travel from a source to another location. (a) Light reaches the upper atmosphere of Earth,
traveling through empty space directly from the source. (b) Light can reach a person by traveling through media like air and
glass. (c) Light can also reflect from an object like a mirror. In the situations shown here, light interacts with objects large enough
that it travels in straight lines, like a ray.
Experimentsshowthatwhenlightinteractswithanobjectseveraltimeslargerthanitswavelength,ittravelsinstraightlines
andactslikearay.Itswavecharacteristicsarenotpronouncedinsuchsituations.Sincethewavelengthofvisiblelightis
lessthanamicron(athousandthofamillimeter),itactslikearayinthemanycommonsituationsinwhichitencounters
objectslargerthanamicron.Forexample,whenvisiblelightencountersanythinglargeenoughthatwecanobserveitwith
unaided eyes, such as a coin, it acts like a ray, with generally negligible wave characteristics.
Inallofthesecases,wecanmodelthepathoflightasstraightlines.Lightmaychangedirectionwhenitencountersobjects
(suchasamirror)orinpassingfromonematerialtoanother(suchasinpassingfromairtoglass),butitthencontinuesin
astraightlineorasaray.Theword“ray”comesfrommathematicsandheremeansastraightlinethatoriginatesatsome

12 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
point.Itisacceptabletovisualizelightraysaslaserrays.Theraymodeloflightdescribesthepathoflightasstraightlines.
Sincelightmovesinstraightlines,changingdirectionswhenitinteractswithmaterials,itspathisdescribedbygeometry
andsimpletrigonometry.Thispartofoptics,wheretherayaspectoflightdominates,isthereforecalledgeometricoptics.
Twolawsgovernhowlightchangesdirectionwhenitinteractswithmatter.Thesearethelawofreflection,forsituations
in which light bounces off matter, and the law of refraction, for situations in which light passes through matter. We will
examine more about each of these laws in upcoming sections of this chapter.
1.2 | The Law of Reflection
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the reflection of light from polished and rough surfaces
• Describe the principle and applications of corner reflectors
Wheneverwelookintoamirror,orsquintatsunlightglintingfromalake,weareseeingareflection.Whenyoulookata
pieceofwhitepaper,youareseeinglightscatteredfromit.Largetelescopesusereflectiontoformanimageofstarsand
other astronomical objects.
Thelaw of reflectionstates that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence, or
θ r=θ
i
(1.3)
ThelawofreflectionisillustratedinFigure1.5,whichalsoshowshowtheangleofincidenceandangleofreflectionare
measured relative to the perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray strikes.
Figure 1.5 The law of reflection states that the angle of
reflection equals the angle of incidence—θ r=θ
i
. The angles
are measured relative to the perpendicular to the surface at the
point where the ray strikes the surface.
Weexpecttoseereflectionsfromsmoothsurfaces,butFigure1.6illustrateshowaroughsurfacereflectslight.Sincethe
lightstrikesdifferentpartsofthesurfaceatdifferentangles,itisreflectedinmanydifferentdirections,ordiffused.Diffused
light is what allows us to see a sheet of paper from any angle, as shown in Figure 1.7(a). People, clothing, leaves, and
wallsallhaveroughsurfacesandcanbeseenfromallsides.Amirror,ontheotherhand,hasasmoothsurface(compared
withthewavelengthoflight)andreflectslightatspecificangles,asillustratedinFigure 1.7(b).WhentheMoonreflects
from a lake, as shown inFigure 1.7(c), a combination of these effects takes place.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 13
Figure 1.6 Light is diffused when it reflects from a rough surface.
Here, many parallel rays are incident, but they are reflected at many
different angles, because the surface is rough.
Figure 1.7 (a) When a sheet of paper is illuminated with many parallel incident rays, it can be seen at many different angles,
because its surface is rough and diffuses the light. (b) A mirror illuminated by many parallel rays reflects them in only one
direction, because its surface is very smooth. Only the observer at a particular angle sees the reflected light. (c) Moonlight is
spread out when it is reflected by the lake, because the surface is shiny but uneven. (credit c: modification of work by Diego
Torres Silvestre)
Whenyouseeyourselfinamirror,itappearsthattheimageisactuallybehindthemirror(Figure 1.8).Weseethelight
comingfromadirectiondeterminedbythelawofreflection.Theanglesaresuchthattheimageisexactlythesamedistance
behindthemirrorasyoustandinfrontofthemirror.Ifthemirrorisonthewallofaroom,theimagesinitareallbehindthe
mirror,whichcanmaketheroomseembigger.Althoughthesemirrorimagesmakeobjectsappeartobewheretheycannot
be (like behind a solid wall), the images are not figments of your imagination. Mirror images can be photographed and
videotapedbyinstrumentsandlookjustastheydowithoureyes(whichareopticalinstrumentsthemselves).Theprecise
mannerinwhichimagesareformedbymirrorsandlensesisdiscussedinanupcomingchapteronGeometricOpticsand
Image Formation.

14 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Figure 1.8 (a) Your image in a mirror is behind the mirror. The two rays shown are those that strike the mirror at just the
correct angles to be reflected into the eyes of the person. The image appears to be behind the mirror at the same distance away as
(b) if you were looking at your twin directly, with no mirror.
Corner Reflectors (Retroreflectors)
A light ray that strikes an object consisting of two mutually perpendicular reflecting surfaces is reflected back exactly
paralleltothedirectionfromwhichitcame(Figure 1.9).Thisistruewheneverthereflectingsurfacesareperpendicular,
and it is independent of the angle of incidence. (For proof, see at the end of this section.) Such an object is called a
corner reflector, since the light bounces from its inside corner. Corner reflectors are a subclass of retroreflectors, which
allreflectraysbackinthedirectionsfromwhichtheycame.Althoughthegeometryoftheproofismuchmorecomplex,
cornerreflectorscanalsobebuiltwiththreemutuallyperpendicularreflectingsurfacesandareusefulinthree-dimensional
applications.
Figure 1.9 A light ray that strikes two mutually perpendicular
reflecting surfaces is reflected back exactly parallel to the
direction from which it came.
Many inexpensive reflector buttons on bicycles, cars, and warning signs have corner reflectors designed to return light
in the direction from which it originated. Rather than simply reflecting light over a wide angle, retroreflection ensures
high visibility if the observer and the light source are located together, such as a car’s driver and headlights. The Apollo
astronautsplacedatruecornerreflectorontheMoon(Figure 1.10).LasersignalsfromEarthcanbebouncedfromthat
corner reflector to measure the gradually increasing distance to the Moon of a few centimeters per year.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 15
Figure 1.10 (a) Astronauts placed a corner reflector on the Moon to measure its gradually increasing orbital distance. (b) The
bright spots on these bicycle safety reflectors are reflections of the flash of the camera that took this picture on a dark night.
(credit a: modification of work by NASA; credit b: modification of work by “Julo”/Wikimedia Commons)
Workingonthesameprincipleastheseopticalreflectors,cornerreflectorsareroutinelyusedasradarreflectors(Figure
1.11)forradio-frequencyapplications.Undermostcircumstances,smallboatsmadeoffiberglassorwooddonotstrongly
reflectradiowavesemittedbyradarsystems.Tomaketheseboatsvisibletoradar(toavoidcollisions,forexample),radar
reflectors are attached to boats, usually in high places.
Figure 1.11 A radar reflector hoisted on a sailboat is a type of
corner reflector. (credit: Tim Sheerman-Chase)
As a counterexample, if you are interested in building a stealth airplane, radar reflections should be minimized to evade
detection. One of the design considerations would then be to avoid building 90° corners into the airframe.
1.3 | Refraction
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how rays change direction upon entering a medium
• Apply the law of refraction in problem solving
Youmayoftennoticesomeoddthingswhenlookingintoafishtank.Forexample,youmayseethesamefishappearingto
beintwodifferentplaces(Figure1.12).Thishappensbecauselightcomingfromthefishtoyouchangesdirectionwhenit

16 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
leavesthetank,andinthiscase,itcantraveltwodifferentpathstogettoyoureyes.Thechangingofalightray’sdirection
(looselycalledbending)whenitpassesthroughsubstancesofdifferentrefractiveindicesiscalledrefractionandisrelated
tochangesinthespeedoflight, v=c/n.Refractionisresponsibleforatremendousrangeofopticalphenomena,fromthe
action of lenses to data transmission through optical fibers.
Figure 1.12 (a) Looking at the fish tank as shown, we can see the same fish in two different locations, because light changes
directions when it passes from water to air. In this case, the light can reach the observer by two different paths, so the fish seems
to be in two different places. This bending of light is called refraction and is responsible for many optical phenomena. (b) This
image shows refraction of light from a fish near the top of a fish tank.
Figure1.13showshowarayoflightchangesdirectionwhenitpassesfromonemediumtoanother.Asbefore,theangles
aremeasuredrelativetoaperpendiculartothesurfaceatthepointwherethelightraycrossesit.(Someoftheincidentlight
isreflectedfromthesurface,butfornowweconcentrateonthelightthatistransmitted.)Thechangeindirectionofthelight
raydependsontherelativevaluesoftheindicesofrefraction(ThePropagationofLight)ofthetwomediainvolved.In
thesituationsshown,medium2hasagreaterindexofrefractionthanmedium1.NotethatasshowninFigure1.13(a),the
directionoftheraymovesclosertotheperpendicularwhenitprogressesfromamediumwithalowerindexofrefraction
to one with a higher index of refraction. Conversely, as shown in Figure 1.13(b), the direction of the ray moves away
fromtheperpendicularwhenitprogressesfromamediumwithahigherindexofrefractiontoonewithalowerindexof
refraction. The path is exactly reversible.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 17
Figure 1.13 The change in direction of a light ray depends on how the index of refraction
changes when it crosses from one medium to another. In the situations shown here, the index of
refraction is greater in medium 2 than in medium 1. (a) A ray of light moves closer to the
perpendicular when entering a medium with a higher index of refraction. (b) A ray of light
moves away from the perpendicular when entering a medium with a lower index of refraction.
Theamountthatalightraychangesitsdirectiondependsbothontheincidentangleandtheamountthatthespeedchanges.
For a ray at a given incident angle, a large change in speed causes a large change in direction and thus a large change
in angle. The exact mathematical relationship is the law of refraction, or Snell’s law, after the Dutch mathematician
WillebrordSnell(1591–1626), who discovered it in 1621. The law of refraction is stated in equation form as
n sinθ =n sinθ . (1.4)
1 1 2 2
Here n and n aretheindicesofrefractionformedia1and2,and θ and θ aretheanglesbetweentheraysandthe
1 2 1 2
perpendicularinmedia1and2.Theincomingrayiscalledtheincidentray,theoutgoingrayiscalledtherefractedray,and
the associated angles are the incident angle and the refracted angle, respectively.
Snell’s experiments showed that the law of refraction is obeyed and that a characteristic index of refraction n could be
assignedtoagivenmediumanditsvaluemeasured.Snellwasnotawarethatthespeedoflightvariedindifferentmedia,a
key fact used when we derive the law of refraction theoretically using Huygens’s principle inHuygens’s Principle.
Example 1.2
Determining the Index of Refraction
Findtheindexofrefractionformedium2inFigure1.13(a),assumingmedium1isairandgiventhattheincident
angle is 30.0° and the angle of refraction is 22.0°.
Strategy
The index of refraction for air is taken to be 1 in most cases (and up to four significant figures, it is 1.000).
Thus, n =1.00 here. From the given information, θ =30.0° and θ =22.0°. With this information, the
1 1 2
only unknown in Snell’s law is n , so we can use Snell’s law to find it.
2
Solution
From Snell’s law we have
n sinθ = n sinθ
1 1 2 2
sinθ
n = n 1.
2 1sinθ
2