# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 46-52
############################################################

38 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
where n isthemediuminwhichtheincidentandreflectedlighttraveland n istheindexofrefractionofthemedium
1 2
thatformstheinterfacethatreflectsthelight.ThisequationisknownasBrewster’slawand θ isknownasBrewster’s
b
angle, named after the nineteenth-century Scottish physicist who discovered them.
ThisOpenSourcePhysicsanimation(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21phyaniincref)showsincident,
reflected,andrefractedlightasraysandEMwaves.Tryrotatingtheanimationfor3Dvisualizationandalsochange
the angle of incidence. Near Brewster’s angle, the reflected light becomes highly polarized.
Example 1.8
Calculating Polarization by Reflection
(a)Atwhatanglewilllighttravelinginairbecompletelypolarizedhorizontallywhenreflectedfromwater?(b)
From glass?
Strategy
Allweneedtosolvetheseproblemsaretheindicesofrefraction.Airhas n =1.00, waterhas n =1.333,
1 2
n
and crown glass has n 2 ′ =1.520. The equation tanθ b = n 2 1 can be directly applied to find θ b in each case.
Solution
a. Putting the known quantities into the equation
n
tanθ b = n 2
1
gives
n
tanθ b = n 2 1 = 1 1 .3 .0 3 0 3 =1.333.
Solving for the angle θ yields
b
θ =tan−1 1.333=53.1°.
b
b. Similarly, for crown glass and air,
n′
tanθ b ′ = n 2 1 = 1 1 .5 .0 2 0 0 =1.52.
Thus,
θ′ =tan−1 1.52=56.7°.
b
Significance
Lightreflectedattheseanglescouldbecompletelyblockedbyagoodpolarizingfilterheldwithitsaxisvertical.
Brewster’sangleforwaterandairaresimilartothoseforglassandair,sothatsunglassesareequallyeffective
forlightreflectedfromeitherwaterorglassundersimilarcircumstances.Lightthatisnotreflectedisrefracted
intothesemedia.Therefore,atanincidentangleequaltoBrewster’sangle,therefractedlightisslightlypolarized
vertically.Itisnotcompletelypolarizedvertically,becauseonlyasmallfractionoftheincidentlightisreflected,
so a significant amount of horizontally polarized light is refracted.
1.7 Check YourUnderstanding What happens at Brewster’sangle ifthe original incident light isalready
100% vertically polarized?
Atomic Explanation of Polarizing Filters
Polarizing filters have a polarization axis that acts as a slit. This slit passes EM waves (often visible light) that have an
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 39
electricfieldparalleltotheaxis.Thisisaccomplishedwithlongmoleculesalignedperpendiculartotheaxis,asshownin
Figure 1.39.
Figure 1.39 Long molecules are aligned perpendicular to the
axis of a polarizing filter. In an EM wave, the component of the
electric field perpendicular to these molecules passes through
the filter, whereas the component parallel to the molecules is
absorbed.
Figure 1.40illustrates howthecomponentoftheelectric fieldparallel tothelongmolecules isabsorbed.AnEMwave
iscomposed ofoscillating electric andmagnetic fields. Theelectric field isstrongcompared withthemagnetic field and
ismoreeffectiveinexertingforceonchargesinthemolecules.Themostaffectedchargedparticlesaretheelectrons,since
electronmassesaresmall.Ifanelectronisforcedtooscillate,itcanabsorbenergyfromtheEMwave.Thisreducesthefield
inthewaveand,hence,reducesitsintensity.Inlongmolecules,electronscanmoreeasilyoscillateparalleltothemolecule
than in the perpendicular direction. The electrons are bound to the molecule and are more restricted in their movement
perpendiculartothemolecule.Thus,theelectronscanabsorbEMwavesthathaveacomponentoftheirelectricfieldparallel
to the molecule. The electrons are much less responsive to electric fields perpendicular to the molecule and allow these
fields to pass. Thus, the axis of the polarizing filter is perpendicular to the length of the molecule.
Figure 1.40 Diagram of an electron in a long molecule oscillating parallel to the molecule. The oscillation of the electron
absorbs energy and reduces the intensity of the component of the EM wave that is parallel to the molecule.
Polarization by Scattering
Ifyouholdyourpolarizingsunglassesinfrontofyouandrotatethemwhilelookingatbluesky,youwillseetheskyget
brightanddim.Thisisaclearindicationthatlightscatteredbyairispartiallypolarized.Figure1.41helpsillustratehow

40 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
thishappens.SincelightisatransverseEMwave,itvibratestheelectronsofairmoleculesperpendiculartothedirection
thatitistraveling.Theelectronsthenradiatelikesmallantennae.Sincetheyareoscillatingperpendiculartothedirectionof
thelightray,theyproduceEMradiationthatispolarizedperpendiculartothedirectionoftheray.Whenviewingthelight
alongalineperpendiculartotheoriginalray,asinthefigure,therecanbenopolarizationinthescatteredlightparalleltothe
originalray,becausethatwouldrequiretheoriginalraytobealongitudinalwave.Alongotherdirections,acomponentof
theotherpolarizationcanbeprojectedalongthelineofsight,andthescatteredlightisonlypartiallypolarized.Furthermore,
multiple scattering can bring light to your eyes from other directions and can contain different polarizations.
Figure 1.41 Polarization by scattering. Unpolarized light scattering from air molecules shakes their electrons
perpendicular to the direction of the original ray. The scattered light therefore has a polarization perpendicular to the
original direction and none parallel to the original direction.
Photographsoftheskycanbedarkenedbypolarizingfilters,atrickusedbymanyphotographerstomakecloudsbrighterby
contrast.Scatteringfromotherparticles,suchassmokeordust,canalsopolarizelight.Detectingpolarizationinscattered
EM waves can be a useful analytical tool in determining the scattering source.
Arangeofopticaleffectsareusedinsunglasses.Besidesbeingpolarizing,sunglassesmayhavecoloredpigmentsembedded
in them, whereas others use either a nonreflective or reflective coating. A recent development is photochromic lenses,
whichdarkeninthesunlightandbecomeclearindoors.Photochromiclensesareembeddedwithorganicmicrocrystalline
molecules that change their properties when exposed to UV in sunlight, but become clear in artificial lighting with no UV.
Liquid Crystals and Other Polarization Effects in Materials
Although you are undoubtedly aware of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) found in watches, calculators, computer screens,
cellphones,flatscreentelevisions,andmanyotherplaces,youmaynotbeawarethattheyarebasedonpolarization.Liquid
crystals are so named because their molecules can be aligned even though they are in a liquid. Liquid crystals have the
propertythattheycanrotatethepolarizationoflightpassingthroughthemby 90°.Furthermore,thispropertycanbeturned
offbytheapplicationofavoltage,asillustratedinFigure1.42.Itispossibletomanipulatethischaracteristicquicklyand
in small, well-defined regions to create the contrast patterns we see in so many LCD devices.
InflatscreenLCDtelevisions,alargelightisgeneratedatthebackoftheTV.Thelighttravelstothefrontscreenthrough
millionsoftinyunitscalledpixels(pictureelements).OneoftheseisshowninFigure1.42(a)and(b).Eachunithasthree
cells,withred,blue,orgreenfilters,eachcontrolledindependently.Whenthevoltageacrossaliquidcrystalisswitchedoff,
theliquidcrystalpassesthelightthroughtheparticularfilter.Wecanvarythepicturecontrastbyvaryingthestrengthofthe
voltage applied to the liquid crystal.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 41
Figure 1.42 (a) Polarized light is rotated 90° by a liquid crystal and then passed by a polarizing filter that has its axis
perpendicular to the direction of the original polarization. (b) When a voltage is applied to the liquid crystal, the polarized light is
not rotated and is blocked by the filter, making the region dark in comparison with its surroundings. (c) LCDs can be made color
specific, small, and fast enough to use in laptop computers and TVs. (credit c: modification of work by Jane Whitney)
Manycrystalsandsolutionsrotatetheplaneofpolarizationoflightpassingthroughthem.Suchsubstancesaresaidtobe
opticallyactive.Examplesincludesugarwater,insulin,andcollagen(Figure1.43).Inadditiontodependingonthetype
ofsubstance,theamountanddirectionofrotationdependonseveralotherfactors.Amongtheseistheconcentrationofthe
substance,thedistancethelighttravelsthroughit,andthewavelengthoflight.Opticalactivityisduetotheasymmetrical
shapeofmoleculesinthesubstance,suchasbeinghelical.Measurementsoftherotationofpolarizedlightpassingthrough
substancescanthusbeusedtomeasureconcentrations,astandardtechniqueforsugars.Itcanalsogiveinformationonthe
shapes of molecules, such as proteins, and factors that affect their shapes, such as temperature and pH.
Figure 1.43 Optical activity is the ability of some substances to rotate the
plane of polarization of light passing through them. The rotation is detected
with a polarizing filter or analyzer.
Glassandplasticbecomeopticallyactivewhenstressed:thegreaterthestress,thegreatertheeffect.Opticalstressanalysis
oncomplicatedshapescanbeperformedbymakingplasticmodelsofthemandobservingthemthroughcrossedfilters,as
seeninFigure1.44.Itisapparentthattheeffectdependsonwavelengthaswellasstress.Thewavelengthdependenceis

42 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
sometimes also used for artistic purposes.
Figure 1.44 Optical stress analysis of a plastic lens placed
between crossed polarizers. (credit: “Infopro”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Anotherinterestingphenomenonassociatedwithpolarizedlightistheabilityofsomecrystalstosplitanunpolarizedbeam
oflightintotwopolarizedbeams.Thisoccursbecausethecrystalhasonevaluefortheindexofrefractionofpolarizedlight
but a different value for the index of refraction of light polarized in the perpendicular direction, so that each component
hasitsownangleofrefraction.Suchcrystalsaresaidtobebirefringent,and,whenalignedproperly,twoperpendicularly
polarizedbeamswillemergefromthecrystal(Figure1.45).Birefringentcrystalscanbeusedtoproducepolarizedbeams
fromunpolarizedlight.Somebirefringentmaterialspreferentiallyabsorboneofthepolarizations.Thesematerialsarecalled
dichroicandcanproducepolarizationbythispreferentialabsorption.Thisisfundamentallyhowpolarizingfiltersandother
polarizers work.
Figure 1.45 Birefringent materials, such as the common mineral calcite, split unpolarized beams of light into two with two
different values of index of refraction.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 43
CHAPTER 1 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
birefringent refers to crystals that split an unpolarized beam of light into two beams
Brewster’s angle angle of incidence at which the reflected light is completely polarized
Brewster’s law n
tanθ b = n 2,where n 1 isthemediuminwhichtheincidentandreflectedlighttraveland n 2 isthe
1
index of refraction of the medium that forms the interface that reflects the light
corner reflector object consisting of two (or three) mutually perpendicular reflecting surfaces, so that the light that
enters is reflected back exactly parallel to the direction from which it came
critical angle incident angle that produces an angle of refraction of 90°
direction of polarization direction parallel to the electric field for EM waves
dispersion spreading of light into its spectrum of wavelengths
fiber optics field of study of the transmission of light down fibers of plastic or glass, applying the principle of total
internal reflection
geometric optics part of optics dealing with the ray aspect of light
horizontally polarized oscillations are in a horizontal plane
Huygens’s principle everypointonawavefrontisasourceofwaveletsthatspreadoutintheforwarddirectionatthe
same speed as the wave itself; the new wave front is a plane tangent to all of the wavelets
index of refraction for a material, the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to that in a material
law of reflection angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence
law of refraction whenalightraycrossesfromonemediumtoanother,itchangesdirectionbyanamountthatdepends
on the index of refraction of each medium and the sines of the angle of incidence and angle of refraction
Malus’s law where I is the intensity of the polarized wave before passing through the filter
0
optically active substances that rotate the plane of polarization of light passing through them
polarization attributethatwaveoscillationshaveadefinitedirectionrelativetothedirectionofpropagationofthewave
polarized refers to waves having the electric and magnetic field oscillations in a definite direction
ray straight line that originates at some point
refraction changing of a light ray’s direction when it passes through variations in matter
total internal reflection phenomenon at the boundary between two media such that all the light is reflected and no
refraction occurs
unpolarized refers to waves that are randomly polarized
vertically polarized oscillations are in a vertical plane
wave optics part of optics dealing with the wave aspect of light
KEY EQUATIONS
Speed of light c=2.99792458×10 8 m/s≈3.00×10 8 m/s
Index of refraction n= c
v
Law of reflection θ r=θ
i