# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 340-346
############################################################

328 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
7.4 Power
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Relate the work done during a time interval to the power delivered
• Find the power expended by a force acting on a moving body
The concept of work involves force and displacement; the work-energy theorem relates the net work done on a body
to the difference in its kinetic energy, calculated between two points on its trajectory. None of these quantities or
relations involves time explicitly, yet we know that the time available to accomplish a particular amount of work is
frequently just as important to us as the amount itself. In the chapter-opening figure, several sprinters may have
achieved the same velocity at the finish, and therefore did the same amount of work, but the winner of the race did it
in the least amount of time.
We express the relation between work done and the time interval involved in doing it, by introducing the concept of
power. Since work can vary as a function of time, we first define average power as the work done during a time
interval, divided by the interval,
7.10
Then, we can define the instantaneous power (frequently referred to as just plain power).
POWER
Power is defined as the rate of doing work, or the limit of the average power for time intervals approaching zero,
7.11
If the power is constant over a time interval, the average power for that interval equals the instantaneous power,
and the work done by the agent supplying the power is . If the power during an interval varies with time,
then the work done is the time integral of the power,
The work-energy theorem relates how work can be transformed into kinetic energy. Since there are other forms of
energy as well, as we discuss in the next chapter, we can also define power as the rate of transfer of energy. Work
and energy are measured in units of joules, so power is measured in units of joules per second, which has been
given the SI name watts, abbreviation W: . Another common unit for expressing the power capability of
everyday devices is horsepower: .
EXAMPLE 7.11
Pull-Up Power
An 80-kg army trainee does pull-ups on a horizontal bar (Figure 7.14). It takes the trainee 0.8 seconds to raise the
body from a lower position to where the chin is above the bar. How much power do the trainee’s muscles supply
moving his body from the lower position to where the chin is above the bar? (Hint: Make reasonable estimates for
any quantities needed.)
Access for free at openstax.org

7.4 • Power 329
FIGURE 7.14 What is the power expended in doing ten pull-ups in ten seconds?
Strategy
The work done against gravity, going up or down a distance , is Let’s assume that Also,
assume that the arms comprise 10% of the body mass and are not included in the moving mass. With these
assumptions, we can calculate the work done.
Solution
The result we get, applying our assumptions, is
Significance
This is typical for power expenditure in strenuous exercise; in everyday units, it’s somewhat more than one
horsepower
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.8
Estimate the power expended by a weightlifter raising a 150-kg barbell 2 m in 3 s.
The power involved in moving a body can also be expressed in terms of the forces acting on it. If a force acts on a
body that is displaced in a time dt, the power expended by the force is
7.12
where is the velocity of the body. The fact that the limits implied by the derivatives exist, for the motion of a real
body, justifies the rearrangement of the infinitesimals.
EXAMPLE 7.12
Automotive Power Driving Uphill
How much power must an automobile engine expend to move a 1200-kg car up a 15% grade at 90 km/h (Figure
7.15)? Assume that 25% of this power is dissipated overcoming air resistance and friction.

330 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
FIGURE 7.15 We want to calculate the power needed to move a car up a hill at constant speed.
Strategy
At constant velocity, there is no change in kinetic energy, so the net work done to move the car is zero. Therefore the
power supplied by the engine to move the car equals the power expended against gravity and air resistance. By
assumption, 75% of the power is supplied against gravity, which equals where is the angle of
the incline. A 15% grade means This reasoning allows us to solve for the power required.
Solution
Carrying out the suggested steps, we find
or
or about 78 hp. (You should supply the steps used to convert units.)
Significance
This is a reasonable amount of power for the engine of a small to mid-size car to supply Note
that this is only the power expended to move the car. Much of the engine’s power goes elsewhere, for example, into
waste heat. That’s why cars need radiators. Any remaining power could be used for acceleration, or to operate the
car’s accessories.
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Chapter Review 331
Chapter Review
Key Terms
average power work done in a time interval divided power (or instantaneous power) rate of doing work
by the time interval work done when a force acts on something that
kinetic energy energy of motion, one-half an object’s undergoes a displacement from one position to
mass times the square of its speed another
net work work done by all the forces acting on an work-energy theorem net work done on a particle is
object equal to the change in its kinetic energy
Key Equations
Work done by a force over an infinitesimal displacement
Work done by a force acting along a path from A to B
Work done by a constant force of kinetic friction
Work done going from A to B by Earth’s gravity, near its surface
Work done going from A to B by one-dimensional spring force
Kinetic energy of a non-relativistic particle
Work-energy theorem
Power as rate of doing work
Power as the dot product of force and velocity
Summary
7.1 Work non-relativistic speeds.
• The kinetic energy of a system is the sum of the
• The infinitesimal increment of work done by a
kinetic energies of all the particles in the system.
force, acting over an infinitesimal displacement,
• Kinetic energy is relative to a frame of reference,
is the dot product of the force and the
is always positive, and is sometimes given
displacement.
special names for different types of motion.
• The work done by a force, acting over a finite
path, is the integral of the infinitesimal 7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
increments of work done along the path.
• Because the net force on a particle is equal to its
• The work done against a force is the negative of
mass times the derivative of its velocity, the
the work done by the force.
integral for the net work done on the particle is
• The work done by a normal or frictional contact
equal to the change in the particle’s kinetic
force must be determined in each particular
energy. This is the work-energy theorem.
case.
• You can use the work-energy theorem to find
• The work done by the force of gravity, on an
certain properties of a system, without having to
object near the surface of Earth, depends only on
solve the differential equation for Newton’s
the weight of the object and the difference in
second law.
height through which it moved.
• The work done by a spring force, acting from an 7.4 Power
initial position to a final position, depends only
• Power is the rate of doing work; that is, the
on the spring constant and the squares of those
derivative of work with respect to time.
positions.
• Alternatively, the work done, during a time
7.2 Kinetic Energy interval, is the integral of the power supplied
over the time interval.
• The kinetic energy of a particle is the product of
• The power delivered by a force, acting on a
one-half its mass and the square of its speed, for
moving particle, is the dot product of the force

332 7 • Chapter Review
and the particle’s velocity.
Conceptual Questions
7.1 Work in using stairs?
1 . Give an example of something we think of as 7.2 Kinetic Energy
work in everyday circumstances that is not work
8 . A particle of m has a velocity of
in the scientific sense. Is energy transferred or
Is its kinetic energy given by
changed in form in your example? If so, explain
If not, what is the
how this is accomplished without doing work.
correct expression?
2 . Give an example of a situation in which there is a
force and a displacement, but the force does no 9 . One particle has mass m and a second particle
work. Explain why it does no work. has mass 2m. The second particle is moving
with speed v and the first with speed 2v. How do
3 . Describe a situation in which a force is exerted
their kinetic energies compare?
for a long time but does no work. Explain.
10 . A person drops a pebble of mass from a
4 . A body moves in a circle at constant speed. Does
height h, and it hits the floor with kinetic energy
the centripetal force that accelerates the body
K. The person drops another pebble of mass
do any work? Explain.
from a height of 2h, and it hits the floor with the
5 . Suppose you throw a ball upward and catch it same kinetic energy K. How do the masses of
when it returns at the same height. How much the pebbles compare?
work does the gravitational force do on the ball
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
over its entire trip?
11 . The person shown below does work on the lawn
6 . Why is it more difficult to do sit-ups while on a
mower. Under what conditions would the mower
slant board than on a horizontal surface? (See
gain energy from the person pushing the mower?
below.)
Under what conditions would it lose energy?
12 . Work done on a system puts energy into it. Work
done by a system removes energy from it. Give
an example for each statement.
13 . Two marbles of masses m and 2m are dropped
from a height h. Compare their kinetic energies
when they reach the ground.
14 . Compare the work required to accelerate a car
of mass 2000 kg from 30.0 to 40.0 km/h with
that required for an acceleration from 50.0 to
7 . As a young man, Tarzan climbed up a vine to 60.0 km/h.
reach his tree house. As he got older, he decided
15 . Suppose you are jogging at constant velocity.
to build and use a staircase instead. Since the
Are you doing any work on the environment and
work of the gravitational force mg is path
vice versa?
independent, what did the King of the Apes gain
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Chapter Review 333
16 . Two forces act to double the speed of a particle, relationship between these two energy units?
initially moving with kinetic energy of 1 J. One of
19 . A spark of static electricity, such as that you
the forces does 4 J of work. How much work
might receive from a doorknob on a cold dry day,
does the other force do?
may carry a few hundred watts of power. Explain
7.4 Power why you are not injured by such a spark.
17 . Most electrical appliances are rated in watts. 20 . Does the work done in lifting an object depend
Does this rating depend on how long the on how fast it is lifted? Does the power
appliance is on? (When off, it is a zero-watt expended depend on how fast it is lifted?
device.) Explain in terms of the definition of
21 . Can the power expended by a force be negative?
power.
22 . How can a 50-W light bulb use more energy than
18 . Explain, in terms of the definition of power, why
a 1000-W oven?
energy consumption is sometimes listed in
kilowatt-hours rather than joules. What is the
Problems
7.1 Work
23 . How much work does a supermarket checkout
attendant do on a can of soup he pushes 0.600
m horizontally with a force of 5.00 N?
24 . A 75.0-kg person climbs stairs, gaining 2.50 m in
height. Find the work done to accomplish this
task.
25 . (a) Calculate the work done on a 1500-kg 28 . How much work is done by the boy pulling his sister
elevator car by its cable to lift it 40.0 m at 30.0 m in a wagon as shown below?
constant speed, assuming friction averages 100
N. (b) What is the work done on the elevator car
by the gravitational force in this process? (c)
What is the total work done on the elevator car?
26 . Suppose a car travels 108 km at a speed of 30.0
m/s, and uses 2.0 gal of gasoline. Only 30% of
the gasoline goes into useful work by the force
that keeps the car moving at constant speed
despite friction. (The energy content of gasoline
is about 140 MJ/gal.) (a) What is the magnitude
of the force exerted to keep the car moving at
constant speed? (b) If the required force is
directly proportional to speed, how many gallons
29 . A shopper pushes a grocery cart 20.0 m at
will be used to drive 108 km at a speed of 28.0
constant speed on level ground, against a 35.0 N
m/s?
frictional force. He pushes in a direction
below the horizontal. (a) What is the work done
27 . An 85.0-kg man who pushes a crate 4.00 m up
on the cart by friction? (b) What is the work done
along a ramp that makes an angle of with the
on the cart by the gravitational force? (c) What is
horizontal (see below). He exerts a force of 500 N on
the work done on the cart by the shopper? (d)
the crate parallel to the ramp and moves at a
Find the force the shopper exerts, using energy
constant speed. Find the total work done on the
considerations. (e) What is the total work done
crate and the man.
on the cart?
30 . Suppose the ski patrol lowers a rescue sled and
victim, having a total mass of 90.0 kg, down a
slope at constant speed, as shown below.