# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 717-723
############################################################

14 • Chapter Review 705
Additional Problems
104 . Before digital storage devices, such as the What mass of water does she displace? (b) What
memory in your cell phone, music was stored on is her volume? (c) Calculate her density. (d) If
vinyl disks with grooves with varying depths cut her lung capacity is 1.75 L, is she able to float
into the disk. A phonograph used a needle, without treading water with her lungs filled with
which moved over the grooves, measuring the air?
depth of the grooves. The pressure exerted by a
111 . Some fish have a density slightly less than that
phonograph needle on a record is surprisingly
of water and must exert a force (swim) to stay
large. If the equivalent of 1.00 g is supported by
submerged. What force must an 85.0-kg grouper
a needle, the tip of which is a circle with a
exert to stay submerged in salt water if its body
0.200-mm radius, what pressure is exerted on
density is
the record in Pa?
112 . The human circulation system has
105 . Water towers store water above the level of
approximately capillary vessels. Each
consumers for times of heavy use, eliminating
vessel has a diameter of about . Assuming
the need for high-speed pumps. How high above
cardiac output is 5 L/min, determine the average
a user must the water level be to create a gauge
velocity of blood flow through each capillary
pressure of ?
vessel.
106 . The aqueous humor in a person’s eye is exerting
113 . The flow rate of blood through a
a force of 0.300 N on the area of the
-radius capillary is
cornea. What pressure is this in mm Hg?
. (a) What is the speed of the
107 . (a) Convert normal blood pressure readings of blood flow? (b) Assuming all the blood in the
120 over 80 mm Hg to newtons per meter body passes through capillaries, how many of
squared using the relationship for pressure due them must there be to carry a total flow of
to the weight of a fluid rather than a ?
conversion factor. (b) Explain why the blood
114 . The left ventricle of a resting adult’s heart
pressure of an infant would likely be smaller
pumps blood at a flow rate of ,
than that of an adult. Specifically, consider the
increasing its pressure by 110 mm Hg, its speed
smaller height to which blood must be pumped.
from zero to 30.0 cm/s, and its height by 5.00
108 . Pressure cookers have been around for more cm. (All numbers are averaged over the entire
than 300 years, although their use has greatly heartbeat.) Calculate the total power output of
declined in recent years (early models had a the left ventricle. Note that most of the power is
nasty habit of exploding). How much force must used to increase blood pressure.
the latches holding the lid onto a pressure
115 . A sump pump (used to drain water from the
cooker be able to withstand if the circular lid is
basement of houses built below the water table)
in diameter and the gauge pressure
is draining a flooded basement at the rate of
inside is 300 atm? Neglect the weight of the lid.
0.750 L/s, with an output pressure of
109 . Bird bones have air pockets in them to reduce . (a) The water enters a hose
their weight—this also gives them an average with a 3.00-cm inside diameter and rises 2.50 m
density significantly less than that of the bones above the pump. What is its pressure at this
of other animals. Suppose an ornithologist point? (b) The hose goes over the foundation
weighs a bird bone in air and in water and finds wall, losing 0.500 m in height, and widens to
its mass is 45.0 g and its apparent mass when 4.00 cm in diameter. What is the pressure now?
submerged is 3.60 g (assume the bone is You may neglect frictional losses in both parts of
watertight). (a) What mass of water is displaced? the problem.
(b) What is the volume of the bone? (c) What is
116 . A glucose solution being administered with an IV
its average density?
has a flow rate of . What will the
110 . In an immersion measurement of a woman’s
new flow rate be if the glucose is replaced by
density, she is found to have a mass of 62.0 kg in
whole blood having the same density but a
air and an apparent mass of 0.0850 kg when
viscosity 2.50 times that of the glucose? All
completely submerged with lungs empty. (a)

706 14 • Chapter Review
other factors remain constant. increase blood flow by a factor of 10?
117 . A small artery has a length of and 119 . Suppose a blood vessel’s radius is decreased to
a radius of . If the pressure drop 90.0% of its original value by plaque deposits
across the artery is 1.3 kPa, what is the flow rate and the body compensates by increasing the
through the artery? (Assume that the pressure difference along the vessel to keep the
temperature is .) flow rate constant. By what factor must the
pressure difference increase? (b) If turbulence is
118 . Angioplasty is a technique in which arteries
created by the obstruction, what additional
partially blocked with plaque are dilated to
effect would it have on the flow rate?
increase blood flow. By what factor must the
radius of an artery be increased in order to
Challenge Problems
120 . The pressure on the dam shown early in the that of a rectangular solid 13.0 m wide by 20.0
problems section increases with depth. m long by 2.75 m high. The house is heated by a
Therefore, there is a net torque on the dam. Find forced air gas heater. The main uptake air duct of
the net torque. the heater is 0.300 m in diameter. What is the
average speed of air in the duct if it carries a
121 . The temperature of the atmosphere is not
volume equal to that of the house’s interior
always constant and can increase or decrease
every 15 minutes?
with height. In a neutral atmosphere, where
there is not a significant amount of vertical 126 . A garden hose with a diameter of 2.0 cm is used
mixing, the temperature decreases at a rate of to fill a bucket, which has a volume of 0.10 cubic
approximately 6.5 K per km. The magnitude of meters. It takes 1.2 minutes to fill. An adjustable
the decrease in temperature as height increases nozzle is attached to the hose to decrease the
is known as the lapse rate (The symbol is diameter of the opening, which increases the
the upper case Greek letter gamma.) Assume speed of the water. The hose is held level to the
that the surface pressure is ground at a height of 1.0 meters and the
where and diameter is decreased until a flower bed 3.0
the lapse rate is . Estimate the meters away is reached. (a) What is the volume
flow rate of the water through the nozzle when
pressure 3.0 km above the surface of Earth.
the diameter is 2.0 cm? (b) What is the speed of
122 . A submarine is stranded on the bottom of the
the water coming out of the hose? (c) What does
ocean with its hatch 25.0 m below the surface.
the speed of the water coming out of the hose
Calculate the force needed to open the hatch
need to be to reach the flower bed 3.0 meters
from the inside, given it is circular and 0.450 m
away? (d) What is the diameter of the nozzle
in diameter. Air pressure inside the submarine is
needed to reach the flower bed?
1.00 atm.
127 . A frequently quoted rule of thumb in aircraft
123 . Logs sometimes float vertically in a lake because
design is that wings should produce about 1000
one end has become water-logged and denser
N of lift per square meter of wing. (The fact that
than the other. What is the average density of a
a wing has a top and bottom surface does not
uniform-diameter log that floats with 20.0% of
double its area.) (a) At takeoff, an aircraft travels
its length above water?
at 60.0 m/s, so that the air speed relative to the
bottom of the wing is 60.0 m/s. Given the sea
124 . Scurrilous con artists have been known to
represent gold-plated tungsten ingots as pure level density of air as , how fast must
gold and sell them at prices much below gold it move over the upper surface to create the
value but high above the cost of tungsten. With ideal lift? (b) How fast must air move over the
what accuracy must you be able to measure the upper surface at a cruising speed of 245 m/s
mass of such an ingot in and out of water to tell and at an altitude where air density is one-fourth
that it is almost pure tungsten rather than pure that at sea level? (Note that this is not all of the
gold? aircraft’s lift—some comes from the body of the
plane, some from engine thrust, and so on.
125 . The inside volume of a house is equivalent to
Furthermore, Bernoulli’s principle gives an
Access for free at openstax.org

14 • Chapter Review 707
approximate answer because flow over the wing 130 . During a marathon race, a runner’s blood flow
creates turbulence.) increases to 10.0 times her resting rate. Her
blood’s viscosity has dropped to 95.0% of its
128 . Two pipes of equal and constant diameter leave a
normal value, and the blood pressure difference
water pumping station and dump water out of an
across the circulatory system has increased by
open end that is open to the atmosphere (see the
50.0%. By what factor has the average radii of
following figure). The water enters at a pressure of
her blood vessels increased?
two atmospheres and a speed of .
One pipe drops a height of 10 m. What is the velocity 131 . Water supplied to a house by a water main has a
of the water as the water leaves each pipe? pressure of early on a
summer day when neighborhood use is low. This
pressure produces a flow of 20.0 L/min through
a garden hose. Later in the day, pressure at the
exit of the water main and entrance to the house
drops, and a flow of only 8.00 L/min is obtained
through the same hose. (a) What pressure is now
being supplied to the house, assuming
resistance is constant? (b) By what factor did the
flow rate in the water main increase in order to
cause this decrease in delivered pressure? The
pressure at the entrance of the water main is
, and the original flow rate
129 . Fluid originally flows through a tube at a rate of was 200 L/min. (c) How many more users are
. To illustrate the sensitivity of flow there, assuming each would consume 20.0 L/
rate to various factors, calculate the new flow min in the morning?
rate for the following changes with all other
132 . Gasoline is piped underground from refineries to
factors remaining the same as in the original
major users. The flow rate is
conditions. (a) Pressure difference increases by
(about 500 gal/min), the viscosity of gasoline is
a factor of 1.50. (b) A new fluid with 3.00 times
, and its density is
greater viscosity is substituted. (c) The tube is
(a) What minimum diameter must
replaced by one having 4.00 times the length.
the pipe have if the Reynolds number is to be
(d) Another tube is used with a radius 0.100
less than 2000? (b) What pressure difference
times the original. (e) Yet another tube is
must be maintained along each kilometer of the
substituted with a radius 0.100 times the
pipe to maintain this flow rate?
original and half the length, and the pressure
difference is increased by a factor of 1.50.

708 14 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 15
Oscillations
FIGURE 15.1 (a) The Comcast Building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, looming high above the skyline, is approximately 305 meters (1000
feet) tall. At this height, the top floors can oscillate back and forth due to seismic activity and fluctuating winds. (b) Shown above is a
schematic drawing of a tuned, liquid-column mass damper, installed at the top of the Comcast, consisting of a 300,000-gallon reservoir of
water to reduce oscillations.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion
15.4 Pendulums
15.5 Damped Oscillations
15.6 Forced Oscillations
INTRODUCTION We begin the study of oscillations with simple systems of pendulums and springs. Although these
systems may seem quite basic, the concepts involved have many real-life applications. For example, the Comcast
Building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, stands approximately 305 meters (1000 feet) tall. As buildings are built
taller, they can act as inverted, physical pendulums, with the top floors oscillating due to seismic activity and
fluctuating winds. In the Comcast Building, a tuned-mass damper is used to reduce the oscillations. Installed at the
top of the building is a tuned, liquid-column mass damper, consisting of a 300,000-gallon reservoir of water. This U-
shaped tank allows the water to oscillate freely at a frequency that matches the natural frequency of the building.
Damping is provided by tuning the turbulence levels in the moving water using baffles.

710 15 • Oscillations
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the terms period and frequency
• List the characteristics of simple harmonic motion
• Explain the concept of phase shift
• Write the equations of motion for the system of a mass and spring undergoing simple harmonic motion
• Describe the motion of a mass oscillating on a vertical spring
When you pluck a guitar string, the resulting sound has a steady tone and lasts a long time (Figure 15.2). The string
vibrates around an equilibrium position, and one oscillation is completed when the string starts from the initial
position, travels to one of the extreme positions, then to the other extreme position, and returns to its initial
position. We define periodic motion to be any motion that repeats itself at regular time intervals, such as exhibited
by the guitar string or by a child swinging on a swing. In this section, we study the basic characteristics of
oscillations and their mathematical description.
FIGURE 15.2 When a guitar string is plucked, the string oscillates up and down in periodic motion. The vibrating string causes the
surrounding air molecules to oscillate, producing sound waves. (credit: Yutaka Tsutano)
Period and Frequency in Oscillations
In the absence of friction, the time to complete one oscillation remains constant and is called the period (T). Its
units are usually seconds, but may be any convenient unit of time. The word ‘period’ refers to the time for some
event whether repetitive or not, but in this chapter, we shall deal primarily in periodic motion, which is by definition
repetitive.
A concept closely related to period is the frequency of an event. Frequency (f) is defined to be the number of events
per unit time. For periodic motion, frequency is the number of oscillations per unit time. The relationship between
frequency and period is
15.1
The SI unit for frequency is the hertz (Hz) and is defined as one cycle per second:
A cycle is one complete oscillation.
Access for free at openstax.org