# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 652-657
############################################################

640 13 • Gravitation
This is a diameter of only about 6 km. If we use the mass of Earth, we get . This is a diameter
of less than 2 cm! If we pack Earth’s mass into a sphere with the radius , we get a density of
Significance
A neutron star is the most compact object known—outside of a black hole itself. The neutron star is composed of
neutrons, with the density of an atomic nucleus, and, like many black holes, is believed to be the remnant of a
supernova—a star that explodes at the end of its lifetime. To create a black hole from Earth, we would have to
compress it to a density thirteen orders of magnitude greater than that of a neutron star. This process would require
unimaginable force. There is no known mechanism that could cause an Earth-sized object to become a black hole.
For the Sun, you should be able to show that it would have to be compressed to a density only about 80 times that
of a nucleus. (Note: Once the mass is compressed within its Schwarzschild radius, general relativity dictates that it
will collapse to a singularity. These calculations merely show the density we must achieve to initiate that collapse.)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.11
Consider the density required to make Earth a black hole compared to that required for the Sun. What conclusion
can you draw from this comparison about what would be required to create a black hole? Would you expect the
Universe to have many black holes with small mass?
The event horizon
The Schwarzschild radius is also called the event horizon of a black hole. We noted that both space and time are
stretched near massive objects, such as black holes. Figure 13.30 illustrates that effect on space. The distortion
caused by our Sun is actually quite small, and the diagram is exaggerated for clarity. Consider the neutron star,
described in Example 13.15. Although the distortion of space-time at the surface of a neutron star is very high, the
radius is still larger than its Schwarzschild radius. Objects could still escape from its surface.
However, if a neutron star gains additional mass, it would eventually collapse, shrinking beyond the Schwarzschild
radius. Once that happens, the entire mass would be pulled, inevitably, to a singularity. In the diagram, space is
stretched to infinity. Time is also stretched to infinity. As objects fall toward the event horizon, we see them
approaching ever more slowly, but never reaching the event horizon. As outside observers, we never see objects
pass through the event horizon—effectively, time is stretched to a stop.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/21spacetelescop) to view an animated example of these spatial distortions.
Access for free at openstax.org

13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity 641
FIGURE 13.30 The space distortion becomes more noticeable around increasingly larger masses. Once the mass density reaches a critical
level, a black hole forms and the fabric of space-time is torn. The curvature of space is greatest at the surface of each of the first three
objects shown and is finite. The curvature then decreases (not shown) to zero as you move to the center of the object. But the black hole is
different. The curvature becomes infinite: The surface has collapsed to a singularity, and the cone extends to infinity. (Note: These diagrams
are not to any scale.) (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Observational evidence of neutron stars and black holes
The first validated neutron star was discovered by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967. Burnell observed a regular radio
pulse from an distant object, a phenomenon not previously observed. After further analysis and the discovery of a
second pulsar (as the objects would later be called), the researchers and scientific community recognized that the
pulses were caused by rapidly rotating neutron stars. At about the same time, a number of other astronomers,
including Iosof Shklovsky, observed radio sources that would be proven to be neutron stars. These discoveries
renewed interest in black holes. Evidence for black holes is based upon several types of observations, such as
radiation analysis of X-ray binaries, gravitational lensing of the light from distant galaxies, and the motion of visible
objects around invisible partners. We will focus on these later observations as they relate to what we have learned
in this chapter. Although light cannot escape from a black hole for us to see, we can nevertheless see the
gravitational effect of the black hole on surrounding masses.
The closest, and perhaps most dramatic, evidence for a black hole is at the center of our Milky Way galaxy. The
UCLA Galactic Group, using data obtained by the W. M. Keck telescopes, has determined the orbits of several stars
near the center of our galaxy. Some of that data is shown in Figure 13.31. The orbits of two stars are highlighted.
From measurements of the periods and sizes of their orbits, it is estimated that they are orbiting a mass of
approximately 4 million solar masses. Note that the mass must reside in the region created by the intersection of
the ellipses of the stars. The region in which that mass must reside would fit inside the orbit of Mercury—yet nothing
is seen there in the visible spectrum. In 2020, UCLA astrophysicist Andrea Ghez and Plank Institute's (Germany)
Reinhardt Genzel shared the Nobel prize for the discovery of the supermassive object. They shared the prize with
Richard Penrose, whose mathematical models proved that black holes can actually form and align with Einstein's
theory. Since their work, the world has actually seen a black hole, thanks to the Event Horizon Telescope. The global
network of observatories combined massive amounts of data in order to produce remarkable images of two black
holes: first at the center of galaxy Messier 87, and second at the center of the Milky Way, Saggitarious A.

642 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.31 Paths of stars orbiting about a mass at the center of our Milky Way galaxy. From their motion, it is estimated that a black
hole of about 4 million solar masses resides at the center. (credit: modification of work by UCLA Galactic Center Group – W.M. Keck
Observatory Laser Team)
The physics of stellar creation and evolution is well established. The ultimate source of energy that makes stars
shine is the self-gravitational energy that triggers fusion. The general behavior is that the more massive a star, the
brighter it shines and the shorter it lives. The logical inference is that a mass that is 4 million times the mass of our
Sun, confined to a very small region, and that cannot be seen, has no viable interpretation other than a black hole.
Extragalactic observations strongly suggest that black holes are common at the center of galaxies.
INTERACTIVE
Visit the UCLA Galactic Center Group main page (https://openstax.org/l/21galacenter01) for information on X-ray
binaries and gravitational lensing. Visit this page (https://openstax.org/l/21galacenter02) to view the background
and the image of the black hole at the center of the Milky Way.
Dark matter
Stars orbiting near the very heart of our galaxy provide strong evidence for a black hole there, but the orbits of stars
far from the center suggest another intriguing phenomenon that is observed indirectly as well. Recall from
Gravitation Near Earth’s Surface that we can consider the mass for spherical objects to be located at a point at the
center for calculating their gravitational effects on other masses. Similarly, we can treat the total mass that lies
within the orbit of any star in our galaxy as being located at the center of the Milky Way disc. We can estimate that
mass from counting the visible stars and include in our estimate the mass of the black hole at the center as well.
But when we do that, we find the orbital speed of the stars is far too fast to be caused by that amount of matter.
Astronomer Vera Rubin disovered this phenomenon in the 1970s while researching the movement of spiral galaxies.
She observed that their outermost reaches were rotating as quickly as their centers, which was not the predicted
outcome. Figure 13.32 shows the orbital velocities of stars as a function of their distance from the center of the
Milky Way. The blue line represents the velocities we would expect from our estimates of the mass, whereas the
green curve is what we get from direct measurements. Rubin calculated that the rotational velocity of galaxies
should have been enough to cause them to fly apart, unless there was a significant discrepancy between their
observable matter and their actual matter. This became known as the galaxy rotation problem. Rubin proposed that
massive amounts of unseen matter must be present in and around the galaxies for the rotation speeds to occur.
Furthermore, the velocity profile does not follow what we expect from the observed distribution of visible stars. Not
only is the estimate of the total mass inconsistent with the data, but the expected distribution is inconsistent as
well. Rubin’s 1978 discovery provided much more concrete and widespread evidence of dark matter, a term Fritz
Zwicky coined in 1933 when he observed a similar anomaly while examining a galaxy cluster.
Access for free at openstax.org

13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity 643
FIGURE 13.32 The blue curve shows the expected orbital velocity of stars in the Milky Way based upon the visible stars we can see. The
green curve shows that the actually velocities are higher, suggesting additional matter that cannot be seen. (credit: modification of work by
Matthew Newby)
There are two prevailing ideas of what this matter could be—WIMPs and MACHOs. WIMPs stands for weakly
interacting massive particles. These particles (neutrinos are one example) interact very weakly with ordinary matter
and, hence, are very difficult to detect directly. MACHOs stands for massive compact halo objects, which are
composed of ordinary baryonic matter, such as neutrons and protons. There are unresolved issues with both of
these ideas, and far more research will be needed to solve the mystery.

644 13 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
action-at-a-distance force type of force exerted direction along the line connecting the center of
without physical contact mass of each
aphelion farthest point from the Sun of an orbiting non-Euclidean geometry geometry of curved space,
body; the corresponding term for the Moon’s describing the relationships among angles and lines
farthest point from Earth is the apogee on the surface of a sphere, hyperboloid, etc.
apparent weight reading of the weight of an object orbital period time required for a satellite to
on a scale that does not account for acceleration complete one orbit
black hole mass that becomes so dense, that it orbital speed speed of a satellite in a circular orbit; it
collapses in on itself, creating a singularity at the can be also be used for the instantaneous speed for
center surround by an event horizon noncircular orbits in which the speed is not constant
escape velocity initial velocity an object needs to perihelion point of closest approach to the Sun of an
escape the gravitational pull of another; it is more orbiting body; the corresponding term for the
accurately defined as the velocity of an object with Moon’s closest approach to Earth is the perigee
zero total mechanical energy principle of equivalence part of the general theory of
event horizon location of the Schwarzschild radius relativity, it states that there no difference between
and is the location near a black hole from within free fall and being weightless, or a uniform
which no object, even light, can escape gravitational field and uniform acceleration
gravitational field vector field that surrounds the Schwarzschild radius critical radius ( ) such that if
mass creating the field; the field is represented by a mass were compressed to the extent that its
field lines, in which the direction of the field is radius becomes less than the Schwarzschild radius,
tangent to the lines, and the magnitude (or field then the mass will collapse to a singularity, and
strength) is inversely proportional to the spacing of anything that passes inside that radius cannot
the lines; other masses respond to this field escape
gravitationally bound two object are gravitationally space-time concept of space-time is that time is
bound if their orbits are closed; gravitationally essentially another coordinate that is treated the
bound systems have a negative total mechanical same way as any individual spatial coordinate; in
energy the equations that represent both special and
Kepler’s first law law stating that every planet moves general relativity, time appears in the same context
along an ellipse, with the Sun located at a focus of as do the spatial coordinates
the ellipse spring tide high tide created when the Moon, the Sun,
Kepler’s second law law stating that a planet sweeps and Earth are along one line
out equal areas in equal times, meaning it has a theory of general relativity Einstein’s theory for
constant areal velocity gravitation and accelerated reference frames; in this
Kepler’s third law law stating that the square of the theory, gravitation is the result of mass and energy
period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major distorting the space-time around it; it is also often
axis of the orbit referred to as Einstein’s theory of gravity
neap tide low tide created when the Moon and the tidal force difference between the gravitational force
Sun form a right triangle with Earth at the center of a body and that at any other location
neutron star most compact object known—outside of on the body; the tidal force stretches the body
a black hole itself universal gravitational constant constant
Newton’s law of gravitation every mass attracts representing the strength of the gravitational force,
every other mass with a force proportional to the that is believed to be the same throughout the
product of their masses, inversely proportional to universe
the square of the distance between them, and with
Key Equations
Newton’s law of gravitation
Acceleration due to gravity
at the surface of Earth
Access for free at openstax.org