# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 437-444
############################################################

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 429
Figure 9.21 (a) An electron from the conduction band is excited into the empty state resulting from the acceptor impurity; (b)
formation of an impurity band in ap-type semiconductor.
The electric current of a doped semiconductor can be due to the motion of a majority carrier, in which holes are
contributedbyanimpurityatom,orduetoaminoritycarrier,inwhichholesarecontributedpurelybythermalexcitations
ofelectronsacrosstheenergygap.Inann-typesemiconductor,majoritycarriersarefreeelectronscontributedbyimpurity
atoms,andminoritycarriersarefreeelectronsproducedbythermalexcitationsfromthevalencetotheconductionband.In
a p-type semiconductor, the majority carriers are free holes contributed by impurity atoms, and minority carriers are free
holesleftbythefillingofstatesduetothermalexcitationofelectronsacrossthegap.Ingeneral,thenumberofmajority
carriersfarexceedstheminoritycarriers.Theconceptofamajorityandminoritycarrierswillbeusedinthenextsectionto
explain the operation of diodes and transistors.
In studying p- and n-type doping, it is natural to ask: Do “electron holes” really act like particles? The existence of
holesinadopedp-typesemiconductorisdemonstratedbytheHalleffect.TheHalleffectistheproductionofapotential
difference due to the motion of a conductor through an external magnetic field (see The Hall Effect (http://cnx.org/
content/m58744/latest/)).AschematicoftheHalleffectisshowninFigure9.22(a).Asemiconductorstripisbathed
in a uniform magnetic field (which points into the paper). As the electron holes move from left to right through the
semiconductor, a Lorentz force drives these charges toward the upper end of the strip. (Recall that the motion of the
positively charged carriers is determined by the right-hand rule.) Positive charge continues to collect on the upper edge
of the strip until the force associated with the downward electric field between the upper and lower edges of the strip
(F E=Eq) just balances the upward magnetic force (F B=qvB). Setting these forces equal to each other, we have
E=vB. The voltage that develops across the strip is therefore
V =vBw, (9.33)
H
where V is the Hall voltage; v is the hole’s drift velocity, or average velocity of a particle that moves in a partially
H
random fashion; B is the magnetic field strength; and w is the width of the strip. Note that the Hall voltage is transverse
tothevoltagethatinitiallyproducescurrentthroughthematerial.Ameasurementofthesignofthisvoltage(orpotential
difference)confirmsthecollectionofholesonthetopsideofthestrip.ThemagnitudeoftheHallvoltageyieldsthedrift
velocity (v) of the majority carriers.
AdditionalinformationcanalsobeextractedfromtheHallvoltage.Notethattheelectroncurrentdensity(theamountof
current per unit cross-sectional area of the semiconductor strip) is
j=nqv, (9.34)
whereqisthemagnitudeofthecharge,nisthenumberofchargecarriersperunitvolume,andvisthedriftvelocity.The
currentdensityiseasilydeterminedbydividingthetotalcurrentbythecross-sectionalareaofthestrip,qischargeofthe
hole(themagnitudeofthechargeofasingleelectron),anduisdeterminedbytheHalleffectEquation9.34.Hence,the
aboveexpressionfortheelectroncurrentdensitygivesthenumberofchargecarriersperunitvolume,n.Asimilaranalysis
can be conducted for negatively charged carriers in ann-type material (seeFigure 9.22).

430 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
Figure 9.22 The Hall effect. (a) Positively charged electron holes are drawn to the left by a uniform magnetic field that
points downward. An electric field is generated to the right. (b) Negative charged electrons are drawn to the left by a
magnetic field that points up. An electric field is generated to the left.
9.7 | Semiconductor Devices
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe what occurs when n- and p-type materials are joined together using the concept of
diffusion and drift current (zero applied voltage)
• Explain the response of a p-n junction to a forward and reverse bias voltage
• Describe the function of a transistor in an electric circuit
• Use the concept of a p-n junction to explain its applications in audio amplifiers and computers
Semiconductors have many applications in modern electronics. We describe some basic semiconductor devices in this
section. A great advantage of using semiconductors for circuit elements is the fact that many thousands or millions of
semiconductordevicescanbecombinedonthesametinypieceofsiliconandconnectedbyconductingpaths.Theresulting
structure is called an integrated circuit (ic), and ic chips are the basis of many modern devices, from computers and
smartphones to the internet and global communications networks.
Diodes
Perhaps the simplest device that can be created with a semiconductor is a diode. A diode is a circuit element that
allows electric current to flow in only one direction, like a one-way valve (see Model of Conduction in Metals
(http://cnx.org/content/m58730/latest/) ). A diode is created by joining a p-type semiconductor to an n-type
semiconductor(Figure9.23).Thejunctionbetweenthesematerialsiscalledap-njunction.Acomparisonoftheenergy
bandsofasilicon-baseddiodeisshowninFigure9.23(b).Thepositionsofthevalenceandconductionbandsarethesame,
buttheimpuritylevelsarequitedifferent.Whenap-njunctionisformed,electronsfromtheconductionbandofthen-type
materialdiffusetothep-side,wheretheycombinewithholesinthevalenceband.Thismigrationofchargeleavespositive
ionized donor ions on the n-side and negative ionized acceptor ions on the p-side, producing a narrow double layer of
chargeatthep-njunctioncalledthedepletionlayer.Theelectricfieldassociatedwiththedepletionlayerpreventsfurther
diffusion. The potential energy for electrons across thep-njunction is given byFigure 9.24.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 431
Figure 9.23 (a) Representation of ap-njunction. (b) A comparison of the energy bands ofp-type and
n-type silicon prior to equilibrium.

432 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
Figure 9.24 At equilibrium, (a) excess charge resides near the interface and the
net current is zero, and (b) the potential energy difference for electrons (in light
blue) prevents further diffusion of electrons into thep-side.
Thebehaviorofasemiconductordiodecannowbeunderstood.Ifthepositivesideofthebatteryisconnectedtothen-type
material, the depletion layer is widened, and the potential energy difference across the p-n junction is increased. Few or
noneoftheelectrons(holes)haveenoughenergytoclimbthepotentialbarrier,andcurrentissignificantlyreduced.Thisis
calledthereversebiasconfiguration.Ontheotherhand,ifthepositivesideofabatteryisconnectedtothep-typematerial,
thedepletionlayerisnarrowed,thepotentialenergydifferenceacrossthep-njunctionisreduced,andelectrons(holes)flow
easily.Thisiscalledtheforwardbiasconfigurationofthediode.Insum,thediodeallowscurrenttoflowfreelyinone
direction but prevents current flow in the opposite direction. In this sense, the semiconductor diode is a one-way valve.
We can estimate the mathematical relationship between the current and voltage for a diode using the electric potential
concept.ConsiderNnegativelychargedmajoritycarriers(electronsdonatedbyimpurityatoms)inthen-typematerialanda
potentialbarrierVacrossthep-njunction.AccordingtotheMaxwell-Boltzmanndistribution,thefractionofelectronsthat
haveenoughenergytodiffuseacrossthepotentialbarrieris Ne
−eV/k
B
T
.However,ifabatteryofvoltage V isappliedin
b
theforward-biasconfiguration,thisfractionimprovesto Ne
−e⎛
⎝
V−Vb ⎞ ⎠/k
B
T
.Theelectriccurrentduetothemajoritycarriers
from then-side to thep-side is therefore
I =Ne
−eV/k
B
T
e
eVb/k
B
T
=I e
eVb/k
B
T
,
(9.35)
0
where I is the current with no applied voltage and T is the temperature. Current due to the minority carriers (thermal
0
excitationofelectronsfromthevalencebandtotheconductionbandonthep-sideandsubsequentattractiontothen-side)
is −I , independent of the bias voltage. The net current is therefore
0
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 433
I =I
⎛
e
eVb/k
B
T
−1
⎞
.
(9.36)
net 0⎝ ⎠
AsamplegraphofthecurrentversusbiasvoltageisgiveninFigure9.25.Intheforwardbiasconfiguration,smallchanges
in the bias voltage lead to large changes in the current. In the reverse bias configuration, the current is I ≈−I . For
net 0
extremevaluesofreversebias,theatomsinthematerialareionizedwhichtriggersanavalancheofcurrent.Thiscaseoccurs
at thebreakdown voltage.
Figure 9.25 Current versus voltage across ap-njunction (diode). In the
forward bias configuration, electric current flows easily. However, in the
reverse bias configuration, electric current flow very little.
Example 9.6
Diode Current
Attachingthepositiveendofabatterytothep-sideandthenegativeendtothen-sideofasemiconductordiode
producesacurrentof 4.5×10−1 A. Thereversesaturation currentis 2.2×10 −8 A. (Thereversesaturation
currentisthecurrentofadiodeinareversebiasconfigurationsuchasthis.)Thebatteryvoltageis0.12V.What
is the diode temperature?
Strategy
Thefirstarrangementisaforwardbiasconfiguration,andthesecondisthereversebiasconfiguration.Ineither
case,Equation 9.2gives the current.
Solution
The current in the forward and reverse bias configurations is given by
I =I
⎛
e
eVb/k
B
T
−1
⎞
.
net 0⎝ ⎠
The current with no bias is related to the reverse saturation current by
I ≈ −I =2.2×10 −8 .
0 sat
Therefore
I net = 4.5×10−1 A =2.0×10 8 .
I −8
0 2.2×10 A
Equation 9.2can be written as

434 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
I
net+1=e
eVb/k
B
T
.
I
0
Thisratioismuchgreaterthanone,sothesecondtermontheleft-handsideoftheequationvanishes.Takingthe
natural log of both sides gives
eV
b
=19.
k T
B
The temperature is therefore
T =
eV b⎛1 ⎞
=
e(0.12V) ⎛1 ⎞
=73K.
k
B
⎝19⎠
8.617×10
−5
eV/K
⎝19⎠
Significance
Thecurrentmovingthroughadiodeintheforwardandreversebiasconfigurationissensitivetothetemperature
ofthediode.Ifthepotentialenergysuppliedbythebatteryislargecomparedtothethermalenergyofthediode’s
surroundings, k T, then the forward bias current is very large compared to the reverse saturation current.
B
9.5 Check Your Understanding How does the magnitude of the forward bias current compare with the
reverse bias current?
Createap-njunctionandobservethebehaviorofasimplecircuitforforwardandreversebiasvoltages.Visitthis
site (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21semiconductor)to learn more about semiconductor diodes.
Junction Transistor
Ifdiodesareone-wayvalves,transistorsareone-wayvalvesthatcanbecarefullyopenedandclosedtocontrolcurrent.A
specialkindoftransistorisajunctiontransistor.Ajunctiontransistorhasthreeparts,includingann-typesemiconductor,
also called the emitter; a thin p-type semiconductor, which is the base; and another n-type semiconductor, called the
collector(Figure9.26).Whenapositiveterminalisconnectedtothep-typelayer(thebase),asmallcurrentofelectrons,
calledthebasecurrent I B, flowstotheterminal.Thiscausesalargecollectorcurrent I c toflowthroughthecollector.
The base current can be adjusted to control the large collector current. The current gain is therefore
I c= βI B. (9.37)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 435
Figure 9.26 A junction transistor has three parts: emitter, base,
and collector. Voltage applied to the base acts as a valve to control
electric current from the emitter to the collector.
Ajunctiontransistorcanbeusedtoamplifythevoltagefromamicrophonetodrivealoudspeaker.Inthisapplication,sound
wavescauseadiaphragminsidethemicrophonetomoveinandoutrapidly(Figure9.27).Whenthediaphragmisinthe
“in” position, a tiny positive voltage is applied to the base of the transistor. This opens the transistor “valve” and allows
alargeelectrical current flow tothe loudspeaker.When the diaphragm is inthe “out” position, atiny negative voltage is
appliedtothebaseofthetransistor,whichshutsoffthetransistorvalvesothatnocurrentflowstotheloudspeaker.This
shutsthetransistor“valve”offsonocurrentflowstotheloudspeaker.Inthisway,currenttothespeakeriscontrolledbythe
sound waves, and the sound is amplified. Any electric device that amplifies a signal is called anamplifier.
Figure 9.27 An audio amplifier based on a junction transistor. Voltage applied to the base by a microphone acts as a
valve to control a larger electric current that passes through a loudspeaker.