# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 641-647
############################################################

13.5 • Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion 629
FIGURE 13.21 The element of area swept out in time as the planet moves through angle . The angle between the radial direction
and is .
The areal velocity is simply the rate of change of area with time, so we have
Since the angular momentum is constant, the areal velocity must also be constant. This is exactly Kepler’s second
law. As with Kepler’s first law, Newton showed it was a natural consequence of his law of gravitation.
INTERACTIVE
You can view an animated version (https://openstax.org/l/21animationgrav) of Figure 13.20, and many other
interesting animations as well, at the School of Physics (University of New South Wales) site.
Kepler’s Third Law
Kepler’s third law states that the square of the period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of the orbit.
In Satellite Orbits and Energy, we derived Kepler’s third law for the special case of a circular orbit. Equation 13.8
gives us the period of a circular orbit of radius r about Earth:
For an ellipse, recall that the semi-major axis is one-half the sum of the perihelion and the aphelion. For a circular
orbit, the semi-major axis (a) is the same as the radius for the orbit. In fact, Equation 13.8 gives us Kepler’s third law
if we simply replace r with a and square both sides.
13.11
We have changed the mass of Earth to the more general M, since this equation applies to satellites orbiting any large
mass.
EXAMPLE 13.13
Orbit of Halley’s Comet
Determine the semi-major axis of the orbit of Halley’s comet, given that it arrives at perihelion every 75.3 years. If
the perihelion is 0.586 AU, what is the aphelion?
Strategy
We are given the period, so we can rearrange Equation 13.11, solving for the semi-major axis. Since we know the
value for the perihelion, we can use the definition of the semi-major axis, given earlier in this section, to find the
aphelion. We note that 1 Astronomical Unit (AU) is the average radius of Earth’s orbit and is defined to be
.

630 13 • Gravitation
Solution
Rearranging Equation 13.11 and inserting the values of the period of Halley’s comet and the mass of the Sun, we
have
This yields a value of or 17.8 AU for the semi-major axis.
The semi-major axis is one-half the sum of the aphelion and perihelion, so we have
Substituting for the values, we found for the semi-major axis and the value given for the perihelion, we find the value
of the aphelion to be 35.0 AU.
Significance
Edmond Halley, a contemporary of Newton, first suspected that three comets, reported in 1531, 1607, and 1682,
were actually the same comet. Before Tycho Brahe made measurements of comets, it was believed that they were
one-time events, perhaps disturbances in the atmosphere, and that they were not affected by the Sun. Halley used
Newton’s new mechanics to predict his namesake comet’s return in 1758.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.9
The nearly circular orbit of Saturn has an average radius of about 9.5 AU and has a period of 30 years, whereas
Uranus averages about 19 AU and has a period of 84 years. Is this consistent with our results for Halley’s comet?
13.6 Tidal Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the origins of Earth’s ocean tides
• Describe how neap and leap tides differ
• Describe how tidal forces affect binary systems
The origin of Earth’s ocean tides has been a subject of continuous investigation for over 2000 years. But the work of
Newton is considered to be the beginning of the true understanding of the phenomenon. Ocean tides are the result
of gravitational tidal forces. These same tidal forces are present in any astronomical body. They are responsible for
the internal heat that creates the volcanic activity on Io, one of Jupiter’s moons, and the breakup of stars that get
too close to black holes.
Lunar Tides
If you live on an ocean shore almost anywhere in the world, you can observe the rising and falling of the sea level
about twice per day. This is caused by a combination of Earth’s rotation about its axis and the gravitational attraction
of both the Moon and the Sun.
Let’s consider the effect of the Moon first. In Figure 13.22, we are looking “down” onto Earth’s North Pole. One side
of Earth is closer to the Moon than the other side, by a distance equal to Earth’s diameter. Hence, the gravitational
force is greater on the near side than on the far side. The magnitude at the center of Earth is between these values.
Access for free at openstax.org

13.6 • Tidal Forces 631
This is why a tidal bulge appears on both sides of Earth.
FIGURE 13.22 The tidal force stretches Earth along the line between Earth and the Moon. It is the difference between the gravitational
force from the far side to the near side, along with the orbit of Earth and the Moon around each other, that creates the tidal bulge on both
sides of the planet. Tidal variations of the oceans are on the order of few meters; hence, this diagram is greatly exaggerated.
The net force on Earth causes it to orbit about the Earth-Moon center of mass, located about 1600 km below Earth’s
surface along the line between Earth and the Moon. The tidal force can be viewed as the difference between the
force at the center of Earth and that at any other location. In Figure 13.23, this difference is shown at sea level,
where we observe the ocean tides. (Note that the change in sea level caused by these tidal forces is measured from
the baseline sea level. We saw earlier that Earth bulges many kilometers at the equator due to its rotation. This
defines the baseline sea level and here we consider only the much smaller tidal bulge measured from that baseline
sea level.)
FIGURE 13.23 The tidal force is the difference between the gravitational force at the center and that elsewhere. In this figure, the tidal
forces are shown at the ocean surface. These forces would diminish to zero as you approach Earth’s center.
Why does the rise and fall of the tides occur twice per day? Look again at Figure 13.22. If Earth were not rotating
and the Moon was fixed, then the bulges would remain in the same location on Earth. Relative to the Moon, the
bulges stay fixed—along the line connecting Earth and the Moon. But Earth rotates (in the direction shown by the
blue arrow) approximately every 24 hours. In 6 hours, the near and far locations of Earth move to where the low
tides are occurring, and 6 hours later, those locations are back to the high-tide position. Since the Moon also orbits
Earth approximately every 28 days, and in the same direction as Earth rotates, the time between high (and low)
tides is actually about 12.5 hours. The actual timing of the tides is complicated by numerous factors, the most
important of which is another astronomical body—the Sun.
The Effect of the Sun on Tides
In addition to the Moon’s tidal forces on Earth’s oceans, the Sun exerts a tidal force as well. The gravitational
attraction of the Sun on any object on Earth is nearly 200 times that of the Moon. However, as we show later in an

632 13 • Gravitation
example, the tidal effect of the Sun is less than that of the Moon, but a significant effect nevertheless. Depending
upon the positions of the Moon and Sun relative to Earth, the net tidal effect can be amplified or attenuated.
Figure 13.22 illustrates the relative positions of the Sun and the Moon that create the largest tides, called spring
tides (or leap tides). During spring tides, Earth, the Moon, and the Sun are aligned and the tidal effects add. (Recall
that the tidal forces cause bulges on both sides.) Figure 13.22(c) shows the relative positions for the smallest tides,
called neap tides. The extremes of both high and low tides are affected. Spring tides occur during the new or full
moon, and neap tides occur at half-moon.
INTERACTIVE
You can see an animation (https://openstax.org/l/21tidesinmot01) of the tides in motion.
FIGURE 13.24 (a and b) The spring tides occur when the Sun and the Moon are aligned, whereas (c) the neap tides occur when the Sun and
Moon make a right triangle with Earth. (Figure is not drawn to scale.)
The Magnitude of the Tides
With accurate data for the positions of the Moon and the Sun, the time of maximum and minimum tides at most
locations on our planet can be predicted accurately.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/21tidepredic) to generate tide predictions for up to 2 years in the past or future,
Access for free at openstax.org

13.6 • Tidal Forces 633
at more than 3000 locations around the United States.
The magnitude of the tides, however, is far more complicated. The relative angles of Earth and the Moon determine
spring and neap tides, but the magnitudes of these tides are affected by the distances from Earth as well. Tidal
forces are greater when the distances are smaller. Both the Moon’s orbit about Earth and Earth’s orbit about the Sun
are elliptical, so a spring tide is exceptionally large if it occurs when the Moon is at perigee and Earth is at perihelion.
Conversely, it is relatively small if it occurs when the Moon is at apogee and Earth is at aphelion.
The greatest causes of tide variation are the topography of the local shoreline and the bathymetry (the profile of the
depth) of the ocean floor. The range of tides due to these effects is astounding. Although ocean tides are much
smaller than a meter in many places around the globe, the tides at the Bay of Fundy (Figure 13.25), on the east
coast of Canada, can be as much as 16.3 meters.
FIGURE 13.25 Boats in the Bay of Fundy at high and low tides. The twice-daily change in sea level creates a real challenge to the safe
mooring of boats. (credit: modification of works by Dylan Kereluk)
EXAMPLE 13.14
Comparing Tidal Forces
Compare the Moon’s gravitational force on a 1.0-kg mass located on the near side and another on the far side of
Earth. Repeat for the Sun and then compare the results to confirm that the Moon’s tidal forces are about twice that
of the Sun.
Strategy
We use Newton’s law of gravitation given by Equation 13.1. We need the masses of the Moon and the Sun and their
distances from Earth, as well as the radius of Earth. We use the astronomical data from Appendix D.
Solution
Substituting the mass of the Moon and mean distance from Earth to the Moon, we have
In the denominator, we use the minus sign for the near side and the plus sign for the far side. The results are
The Moon’s gravitational force is nearly 7% higher at the near side of Earth than at the far side, but both forces are
much less than that of Earth itself on the 1.0-kg mass. Nevertheless, this small difference creates the tides. We now
repeat the problem, but substitute the mass of the Sun and the mean distance between the Earth and Sun. The
results are

634 13 • Gravitation
We have to keep six significant digits since we wish to compare the difference between them to the difference for
the Moon. (Although we can’t justify the absolute value to this accuracy, since all values in the calculation are the
same except the distances, the accuracy in the difference is still valid to three digits.) The difference between the
near and far forces on a 1.0-kg mass due to the Moon is
whereas the difference for the Sun is
Note that a more proper approach is to write the difference in the two forces with the difference between the near
and far distances explicitly expressed. With just a bit of algebra we can show that
where and are the same to three significant digits, but their difference , equal to the diameter of
Earth, is also known to three significant digits. The results of the calculation are the same. This approach would be
necessary if the number of significant digits needed exceeds that available on your calculator or computer.
Significance
Note that the forces exerted by the Sun are nearly 200 times greater than the forces exerted by the Moon. But the
difference in those forces for the Sun is half that for the Moon. This is the nature of tidal forces. The Moon has a
greater tidal effect because the fractional change in distance from the near side to the far side is so much greater for
the Moon than it is for the Sun.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.10
Earth exerts a tidal force on the Moon. Is it greater than, the same as, or less than that of the Moon on Earth? Be
careful in your response, as tidal forces arise from the difference in gravitational forces between one side and the
other. Look at the calculations we performed for the tidal force on Earth and consider the values that would change
significantly for the Moon. The diameter of the Moon is one-fourth that of Earth. Tidal forces on the Moon are not
easy to detect, since there is no liquid on the surface.
Other Tidal Effects
Tidal forces exist between any two bodies. The effect stretches the bodies along the line between their centers.
Although the tidal effect on Earth’s seas is observable on a daily basis, long-term consequences cannot be observed
so easily. One consequence is the dissipation of rotational energy due to friction during flexure of the bodies
themselves. Earth’s rotation rate is slowing down as the tidal forces transfer rotational energy into heat. The other
effect, related to this dissipation and conservation of angular momentum, is called “locking” or tidal
synchronization. It has already happened to most moons in our solar system, including Earth’s Moon. The Moon
keeps one face toward Earth—its rotation rate has locked into the orbital rate about Earth. The same process is
happening to Earth, and eventually it will keep one face toward the Moon. If that does happen, we would no longer
see tides, as the tidal bulge would remain in the same place on Earth, and half the planet would never see the Moon.
However, this locking will take many billions of years, perhaps not before our Sun expires.
One of the more dramatic example of tidal effects is found on Io, one of Jupiter’s moons. In 1979, the Voyager
spacecraft sent back dramatic images of volcanic activity on Io. It is the only other astronomical body in our solar
system on which we have found such activity. Figure 13.26 shows a more recent picture of Io taken by the New
Horizons spacecraft on its way to Pluto, while using a gravity assist from Jupiter.
Access for free at openstax.org