# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 32-39
############################################################

24 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Explorerefraction and reflection of light (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21bendoflight) betweentwo
mediawithdifferentindicesofrefraction.Trytomaketherefractedraydisappearwithtotalinternalreflection.Use
the protractor tool to measure the critical angle and compare with the prediction fromEquation 1.5.
1.5 | Dispersion
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the cause of dispersion in a prism
• Describe the effects of dispersion in producing rainbows
• Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of dispersion
Everyoneenjoysthespectacleofarainbowglimmeringagainstadarkstormysky.Howdoessunlightfallingoncleardrops
ofraingetbrokenintotherainbowofcolorswesee?Thesameprocesscauseswhitelighttobebrokenintocolorsbyaclear
glass prism or a diamond (Figure 1.20).
Figure 1.20 The colors of the rainbow (a) and those produced by a prism (b) are identical. (credit a: modification of work by
“Alfredo55”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by NASA)
Weseeaboutsixcolorsinarainbow—red,orange,yellow,green,blue,andviolet;sometimesindigoislisted,too.These
colorsareassociatedwithdifferentwavelengthsoflight,asshowninFigure1.21.Whenoureyereceivespure-wavelength
light,wetendtoseeonlyoneofthesixcolors,dependingonwavelength.Thethousandsofotherhueswecansenseinother
situationsareoureye’sresponsetovariousmixturesofwavelengths.Whitelight,inparticular,isafairlyuniformmixture
ofallvisiblewavelengths.Sunlight,consideredtobewhite,actuallyappearstobeabityellow,becauseofitsmixtureof
wavelengths,butitdoescontainallvisiblewavelengths.Thesequenceofcolorsinrainbowsisthesamesequenceasthe
colorsshowninthefigure.Thisimpliesthatwhitelightisspreadoutinarainbowaccordingtowavelength.Dispersionis
definedasthespreadingofwhitelightintoitsfullspectrumofwavelengths.Moretechnically,dispersionoccurswhenever
the propagation of light depends on wavelength.
Figure 1.21 Even though rainbows are associated with six colors, the rainbow is a continuous
distribution of colors according to wavelengths.
Anytypeofwavecanexhibitdispersion.Forexample,soundwaves,alltypesofelectromagneticwaves,andwaterwaves
can be dispersed according to wavelength. Dispersion may require special circumstances and can result in spectacular
displays such as in the production of a rainbow. This is also true for sound, since all frequencies ordinarily travel at the
samespeed.Ifyoulistentosoundthroughalongtube,suchasavacuumcleanerhose,youcaneasilyhearitdispersedby
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 25
interaction with the tube. Dispersion, in fact, can reveal a great deal about what the wave has encountered that disperses
itswavelengths.Thedispersionofelectromagneticradiationfromouterspace,forexample,hasrevealedmuchaboutwhat
exists between the stars—the so-called interstellar medium.
NickMoore’svideo(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21nickmoorevid)discussesdispersionofapulseashe
tapsalongspring.FollowhisexplanationasMoorereplaysthehigh-speedfootageshowinghighfrequencywaves
outrunning the lower frequency waves.
Refractionisresponsiblefordispersioninrainbowsandmanyothersituations.Theangleofrefractiondependsontheindex
ofrefraction,asweknowfromSnell’slaw.Weknowthattheindexofrefractionndependsonthemedium.Butforagiven
medium,nalsodependsonwavelength (Table 1.2).Notethatforagivenmedium,nincreases aswavelength decreases
andisgreatestforvioletlight.Thus,violetlightisbentmorethanredlight,asshownforaprisminFigure1.22(b).White
light is dispersed into the same sequence of wavelengths as seen inFigure 1.20andFigure 1.21.
Medium Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Violet
(660 nm) (610 nm) (580 nm) (550 nm) (470 nm) (410 nm)
Water 1.331 1.332 1.333 1.335 1.338 1.342
Diamond 2.410 2.415 2.417 2.426 2.444 2.458
Glass, crown 1.512 1.514 1.518 1.519 1.524 1.530
Glass, flint 1.662 1.665 1.667 1.674 1.684 1.698
Polystyrene 1.488 1.490 1.492 1.493 1.499 1.506
Quartz, fused 1.455 1.456 1.458 1.459 1.462 1.468
Table 1.2Index of Refractionnin Selected Media at Various Wavelengths
Figure 1.22 (a) A pure wavelength of light falls onto a prism and is refracted at both
surfaces. (b) White light is dispersed by the prism (shown exaggerated). Since the index
of refraction varies with wavelength, the angles of refraction vary with wavelength. A
sequence of red to violet is produced, because the index of refraction increases steadily
with decreasing wavelength.
Example 1.5
Dispersion of White Light by Flint Glass
Abeamofwhitelightgoesfromairintoflintglassatanincidenceangleof 43.2°.Whatistheanglebetweenthe
red (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) parts of the refracted light?

26 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Strategy
ValuesfortheindicesofrefractionforflintglassatvariouswavelengthsarelistedinTable1.2.Usethesevalues
for calculate the angle of refraction for each color and then take the difference to find the dispersion angle.
Solution
Applying the law of refraction for the red part of the beam
n sinθ =n sinθ ,
air air red red
we can solve for the angle of refraction as
θ red =sin−1 ⎛ ⎝ n air n s r i e n d θ air ⎞ ⎠ =sin−1 ⎡ ⎣ (1.00 ( 0 1 ) .6 s 6 in 2) 43.2°⎤ ⎦ =27.0°.
Similarly, the angle of incidence for the violet part of the beam is
θ violet =sin−1 ⎛ ⎝ n ai n r v s i i o n le θ t air ⎞ ⎠ =sin−1 ⎡ ⎣ (1.00 ( 0 1 ) .6 s 9 in 8) 43.2°⎤ ⎦ =26.4°.
The difference between these two angles is
θ −θ =27.0°−26.4°=0.6°.
red violet
Significance
Although 0.6° may seem like a negligibly small angle, if this beam is allowed to propagate a long enough
distance, the dispersion of colors becomes quite noticeable.
1.4 CheckYourUnderstandingIntheprecedingexample,howmuchdistanceinsidetheblockofflintglass
would the red and the violet rays have to progress before they are separated by 1.0 mm?
Rainbowsareproducedbyacombinationofrefractionandreflection.Youmayhavenoticedthatyouseearainbowonly
whenyoulookawayfromtheSun.Lightentersadropofwaterandisreflectedfromthebackofthedrop(Figure1.23).
Thelightisrefractedbothasitentersandasitleavesthedrop.Sincetheindexofrefractionofwatervarieswithwavelength,
thelightisdispersed,andarainbowisobserved(Figure 1.24(a)).(Nodispersionoccursatthebacksurface,becausethe
lawofreflectiondoesnotdependonwavelength.)Theactualrainbowofcolorsseenbyanobserverdependsonthemyriad
raysbeingrefractedandreflectedtowardtheobserver’seyesfromnumerousdropsofwater.Theeffectismostspectacular
whenthebackgroundisdark,asinstormyweather,butcanalsobeobservedinwaterfallsandlawnsprinklers.Thearcofa
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 27
rainbowcomesfromtheneedtobelookingataspecificanglerelativetothedirectionoftheSun,asillustratedinpart(b).If
tworeflectionsoflightoccurwithinthewaterdrop,another“secondary”rainbowisproduced.Thisrareeventproducesan
arcthatliesabovetheprimaryrainbowarc,asinpart(c),andproducescolorsinthereverseorderoftheprimaryrainbow,
with red at the lowest angle and violet at the largest angle.
Figure 1.23 A ray of light falling on this water drop enters and is
reflected from the back of the drop. This light is refracted and
dispersed both as it enters and as it leaves the drop.
Figure 1.24 (a) Different colors emerge in different directions, and so you must look at different locations to see the various
colors of a rainbow. (b) The arc of a rainbow results from the fact that a line between the observer and any point on the arc must
make the correct angle with the parallel rays of sunlight for the observer to receive the refracted rays. (c) Double rainbow. (credit
c: modification of work by “Nicholas”/Wikimedia Commons)
Dispersion may produce beautiful rainbows, but it can cause problems in optical systems. White light used to transmit
messages in a fiber is dispersed, spreading out in time and eventually overlapping with other messages. Since a laser
producesanearlypurewavelength,itslightexperienceslittledispersion,anadvantageoverwhitelightfortransmissionof
information.Incontrast,dispersionofelectromagneticwavescomingtousfromouterspacecanbeusedtodeterminethe
amount of matter they pass through.

28 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
1.6 | Huygens’s Principle
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe Huygens’s principle
• Use Huygens’s principle to explain the law of reflection
• Use Huygens’s principle to explain the law of refraction
• Use Huygens’s principle to explain diffraction
Sofarinthischapter,wehavebeendiscussingopticalphenomenausingtheraymodeloflight.However,somephenomena
requireanalysisandexplanationsbasedonthewavecharacteristicsoflight.Thisisparticularlytruewhenthewavelengthis
notnegligiblecomparedtothedimensionsofanopticaldevice,suchasaslitinthecaseofdiffraction.Huygens’sprinciple
is an indispensable tool for this analysis.
Figure 1.25showshowatransversewavelooksasviewedfromaboveandfromtheside.Alightwavecanbeimagined
topropagatelikethis,althoughwedonotactuallyseeitwigglingthroughspace.Fromabove,weviewthewavefronts(or
wavecrests)asifwewerelookingdownonoceanwaves.Thesideviewwouldbeagraphoftheelectricormagneticfield.
The view from above is perhaps more useful in developing concepts aboutwave optics.
Figure 1.25 A transverse wave, such as an electromagnetic light wave, as viewed from above and from
the side. The direction of propagation is perpendicular to the wave fronts (or wave crests) and is
represented by a ray.
TheDutchscientistChristiaanHuygens(1629–1695)developedausefultechniquefordeterminingindetailhowandwhere
waves propagate. Starting from some known position, Huygens’s principle states that every point on a wave front is a
source of wavelets that spread out in the forward direction at the same speed as the wave itself. The new wave front is
tangent to all of the wavelets.
Figure 1.26showshowHuygens’sprincipleisapplied.Awavefrontisthelongedgethatmoves,forexample,withthe
crestorthetrough.Eachpointonthewavefrontemitsasemicircularwavethatmovesatthepropagationspeedv.Wecan
drawthesewaveletsatatimetlater,sothattheyhavemovedadistance s=vt. Thenewwavefrontisaplanetangentto
thewaveletsandiswherewewouldexpectthewavetobeatimetlater.Huygens’sprincipleworksforalltypesofwaves,
includingwaterwaves,soundwaves,andlightwaves.Itisusefulnotonlyindescribinghowlightwavespropagatebutalso
inexplainingthelawsofreflectionandrefraction.Inaddition,wewillseethatHuygens’sprincipletellsushowandwhere
light rays interfere.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light 29
Figure 1.26 Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wave
front. Each point on the wave front emits a semicircular wavelet
that moves a distance s=vt. The new wave front is a line
tangent to the wavelets.
Reflection
Figure 1.27showshowamirrorreflectsanincomingwaveatanangleequaltotheincidentangle,verifyingthelawof
reflection.Asthewavefrontstrikesthemirror,waveletsarefirstemittedfromtheleftpartofthemirrorandthenfromthe
right.Thewaveletsclosertothelefthavehadtimetotravelfarther,producingawavefronttravelinginthedirectionshown.
Figure 1.27 Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave front
striking a mirror. The wavelets shown were emitted as each
point on the wave front struck the mirror. The tangent to these
wavelets shows that the new wave front has been reflected at an
angle equal to the incident angle. The direction of propagation is
perpendicular to the wave front, as shown by the downward-
pointing arrows.
Refraction
ThelawofrefractioncanbeexplainedbyapplyingHuygens’sprincipletoawavefrontpassingfromonemediumtoanother
(Figure1.28).Eachwaveletinthefigurewasemittedwhenthewavefrontcrossedtheinterfacebetweenthemedia.Since
thespeedoflightissmallerinthesecondmedium,thewavesdonottravelasfarinagiventime,andthenewwavefront
changes direction as shown. This explains why a ray changes direction to become closer to the perpendicular when light
slows down. Snell’s law can be derived from the geometry inFigure 1.28(Example 1.6).

30 Chapter 1 | The Nature of Light
Figure 1.28 Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave front
traveling from one medium to another, where its speed is less. The
ray bends toward the perpendicular, since the wavelets have a lower
speed in the second medium.
Example 1.6
Deriving the Law of Refraction
By examining the geometry of the wave fronts, derive the law of refraction.
Strategy
Consider Figure 1.29, which expands upon Figure 1.28. It shows the incident wave front just reaching the
surface at point A, while point B is still well within medium 1. In the time Δt it takes for a wavelet from
B to reach B′ on the surface at speed v =c/n , a wavelet from A travels into medium 2 a distance of
1 1
AA′=v Δt, where v =c/n . Note that in this example, v is slower than v because n <n .
2 2 2 2 1 1 2
Figure 1.29 Geometry of the law of refraction from medium 1 to medium 2.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9