# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 131-136
############################################################

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 121
DC;thepressureisconstantoverthevolumechange,sotheworkdoneissimply pΔV.Anisothermallinecould
V
also have been used, as we have derived the work for an isothermal process as W =nRTln 2.
V
1
Example 3.5
Isothermal Expansion of an Ideal Gas
Heatisaddedto1molofanidealmonatomicgasconfinedtoacylinderwithamovablepistonatoneend.The
gasexpandsquasi-staticallyataconstanttemperatureof300KuntilitsvolumeincreasesfromVto3V.(a)What
isthechangeininternalenergyofthegas?(b)Howmuchworkdoesthegasdo?(c)Howmuchheatisaddedto
the gas?
Strategy
(a)Becausethesystemisanidealgas,theinternalenergyonlychangeswhenthetemperaturechanges.(b)The
heat added to the system is therefore purely used to do work that has been calculated in Work, Heat, and
Internal Energy. (c) Lastly, the first law of thermodynamics can be used to calculate the heat added to the gas.
Solution
a. Wesawintheprecedingsectionthattheinternalenergyofanidealmonatomicgasisafunctiononlyof
temperature. Since ΔT =0, for this process, ΔE =0.
int
b. The quasi-static isothermal expansion of an ideal gas was considered in the preceding section and was
found to be
W =nRTln V 2 =nRTln 3V
V V
1
3
=(1.00mol)(8.314J/K·mol)(300K)(ln3)=2.74×10 J.
c. With the results of parts (a) and (b), we can use the first law to determine the heat added:
ΔE =Q−W =0,
int
which leads to
Q=W =2.74×10 3 J.
Significance
An isothermal process has no change in the internal energy. Based on that, the first law of thermodynamics
reduces to Q=W.
3.3 CheckYourUnderstandingWhywasitnecessarytostatethattheprocessofExample 3.5isquasi-
static?
Example 3.6
Vaporizing Water
When1.00gofwaterat 100°C changesfromtheliquidtothegasphaseatatmosphericpressure,itschangein
volumeis 1.67×10 −3 m 3 . (a)Howmuchheatmustbeaddedtovaporizethewater?(b)Howmuchworkis
donebythewateragainsttheatmosphereinitsexpansion?(c)Whatisthechangeintheinternalenergyofthe
water?

122 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
Strategy
We can first figure out how much heat is needed from the latent heat of vaporization of the water. From the
volumechange,wecancalculatetheworkdonefrom W = pΔV becausethepressureisconstant.Then,thefirst
law of thermodynamics provides us with the change in the internal energy.
Solution
a. With L representing the latent heat of vaporization, the heat required to vaporize the water is
v
Q=mL v=(1.00g)(2.26×10 3 J/g)=2.26×10 3 J.
b. Since the pressure on the system is constant at 1.00atm=1.01×10 5 N/m2, the work done by the
water as it is vaporized is
W = pΔV =(1.01×10 5 N/m2)(1.67×10 −3 m 3 )=169J.
c. From the first law, the thermal energy of the water during its vaporization changes by
ΔE =Q−W =2.26×10 3 J−169J=2.09×10 3 J.
int
Significance
Wenotethatinpart(c),weseeachangeininternalenergy,yetthereisnochangeintemperature.Idealgasesthat
arenotundergoingphasechangeshavetheinternalenergyproportionaltotemperature.Internalenergyingeneral
is the sum of all energy in the system.
3.4 CheckYourUnderstandingWhen1.00gofammoniaboilsatatmosphericpressureand −33.0°C, its
volumechangesfrom1.47to 1130cm 3.Itsheatofvaporizationatthispressureis 1.37×10 6 J/kg. Whatis
the change in the internal energy of the ammonia when it vaporizes?
View this site (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/211stlawthermo) to learn about how the first law of
thermodynamics.First,pumpsomeheavyspeciesmoleculesintothechamber.Then,playaroundbydoingwork
(pushing the wall to the right where the person is located) to see how the internal energy changes (as seen by
temperature).Then,lookathowheataddedchangestheinternalenergy.Finally,youcansetaparameterconstant
suchastemperatureandseewhathappenswhenyoudoworktokeepthetemperatureconstant(Note:Youmight
see a change in these variables initially if you are moving around quickly in the simulation, but ultimately, this
value will return to its equilibrium value).
3.4 | Thermodynamic Processes
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define a thermodynamic process
• Distinguish between quasi-static and non-quasi-static processes
• Calculate physical quantities, such as the heat transferred, work done, and internal energy
change for isothermal, adiabatic, and cyclical thermodynamic processes
Insolvingmechanicsproblems,weisolatethebodyunderconsideration,analyzetheexternalforcesactingonit,andthen
useNewton’slawstopredictitsbehavior.Inthermodynamics,wetakeasimilarapproach.Westartbyidentifyingthepart
oftheuniversewewishtostudy;itisalsoknownasoursystem.(Wedefinedasystematthebeginningofthischapteras
anything whose properties are of interest to us; it can be a single atom or the entire Earth.) Once our system is selected,
wedeterminehowtheenvironment,orsurroundings,interactwiththesystem.Finally,withtheinteractionunderstood,we
study the thermal behavior of the system with the help of the laws of thermodynamics.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 123
Thethermalbehaviorofasystemisdescribedintermsofthermodynamicvariables.Foranidealgas,thesevariablesare
pressure,volume,temperature,andthenumberofmoleculesormolesofthegas.Differenttypesofsystemsaregenerally
characterized by different sets of variables. For example, the thermodynamic variables for a stretched rubber band are
tension, length, temperature, and mass.
Thestateofasystemcanchangeasaresultofitsinteractionwiththeenvironment.Thechangeinasystemcanbefastor
slowandlargeorsmall.Themannerinwhichastateofasystemcanchangefromaninitialstatetoafinalstateiscalled
athermodynamicprocess.Foranalyticalpurposesinthermodynamics,itishelpfultodivideupprocessesaseitherquasi-
staticornon-quasi-static, as we now explain.
Quasi-static and Non-quasi-static Processes
Aquasi-staticprocessreferstoanidealizedorimaginedprocesswherethechangeinstateismadeinfinitesimallyslowlyso
thatateachinstant,thesystemcanbeassumedtobeatathermodynamicequilibriumwithitselfandwiththeenvironment.
Forinstance,imagineheating1kgofwaterfromatemperature 20°C to 21°C ataconstantpressureof1atmosphere.To
heatthewaterveryslowly,wemayimagineplacingthecontainerwithwaterinalargebaththatcanbeslowlyheatedsuch
thatthetemperature ofthebathcanriseinfinitesimally slowlyfrom 20°C to 21°C.Ifweput1kgofwaterat 20°C
directly into a bath at 21°C, the temperature of the water will rise rapidly to 21°C in a non-quasi-static way.
Quasi-static processes are done slowly enough that the system remains at thermodynamic equilibrium at each instant,
despitethefactthatthesystemchangesovertime.Thethermodynamicequilibriumofthesystemisnecessaryforthesystem
tohavewell-definedvaluesofmacroscopicpropertiessuchasthetemperatureandthepressureofthesystemateachinstant
of the process. Therefore, quasi-static processes can be shown as well-defined paths in state space of the system.
Since quasi-static processes cannot be completely realized for any finite change of the system, all processes in nature
are non-quasi-static. Examples of quasi-static and non-quasi-static processes are shown in Figure 3.8. Despite the fact
thatallfinitechangesmustoccuressentiallynon-quasi-staticallyatsomestageofthechange,wecanimagineperforming
infinitely many quasi-static process corresponding to every quasi-static process. Since quasi-static processes can be
analyzedanalytically,wemostlystudyquasi-staticprocessesinthisbook.Wehavealreadyseenthatinaquasi-staticprocess
the work by a gas is given bypdV.
Figure 3.8 Quasi-static and non-quasi-static processes
between statesAandBof a gas. In a quasi-static process, the
path of the process betweenAandBcan be drawn in a state
diagram since all the states that the system goes through are
known. In a non-quasi-static process, the states betweenAandB
are not known, and hence no path can be drawn. It may follow
the dashed line as shown in the figure or take a very different
path.
Isothermal Processes
Anisothermal processisachange inthestate ofthesystem ataconstant temperature. Thisprocessisaccomplished by
keepingthesysteminthermalequilibriumwithalargeheatbathduringtheprocess.Recallthataheatbathisanidealized
“infinitely”largesystemwhosetemperaturedoesnotchange.Inpractice,thetemperatureofafinitebathiscontrolledby
either adding or removing a finite amount of energy as the case may be.
Asanillustrationofanisothermalprocess,consideracylinderofgaswithamovablepistonimmersedinalargewatertank

124 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
whosetemperatureismaintainedconstant.Sincethepistonisfreelymovable,thepressureinside P isbalancedbythe
in
pressure outside P by some weights on the piston, as inFigure 3.9.
out
Figure 3.9 Expanding a system at a constant temperature. Removing weights on
the piston leads to an imbalance of forces on the piston, which causes the piston to
move up. As the piston moves up, the temperature is lowered momentarily, which
causes heat to flow from the heat bath to the system. The energy to move the piston
eventually comes from the heat bath.
Asweightsonthepistonareremoved,animbalanceofforcesonthepistondevelops.Thenetnonzeroforceonthepiston
wouldcausethepistontoaccelerate,resultinginanincreaseinvolume.Theexpansionofthegascoolsthegastoalower
temperature, whichmakes itpossible fortheheat toenter fromtheheat bathintothesystem until thetemperature ofthe
gas is reset to the temperature of the heat bath. If weights are removed in infinitesimal steps, the pressure in the system
decreasesinfinitesimallyslowly.Thisway,anisothermalprocesscanbeconductedquasi-statically.Anisothermallineon
a(p,V)diagramisrepresentedbyacurvedlinefromstartingpointAtofinishingpointB,asseeninFigure3.10.Foran
ideal gas, an isothermal process is hyperbolic, since for an ideal gas at constant temperature, p∝ 1 .
V
Figure 3.10 An isothermal expansion from a state labeledA
to another state labeledBon apVdiagram. The curve represents
the relation between pressure and volume in an ideal gas at
constant temperature.
An isothermal process studied in this chapter is quasi-statically performed, since to be isothermal throughout the change
of volume, you must be able to state the temperature of the system at each step, which is possible only if the system is
in thermal equilibrium continuously. The system must go out of equilibrium for the state to change, but for quasi-static
processes,weimaginethattheprocessisconductedininfinitesimalstepssuchthatthesedeparturesfromequilibriumcan
be made as brief and as small as we like.
Other quasi-static processes of interest for gases are isobaric and isochoric processes. An isobaric process is a process
where the pressure of the system does not change, whereas an isochoric process is a process where the volume of the
system does not change.
Adiabatic Processes
In an adiabatic process, the system is insulated from its environment so that although the state of the system changes,
no heat is allowed to enter or leave the system, as seen in Figure 3.11. An adiabatic process can be conducted either
quasi-staticallyornon-quasi-statically.Whenasystemexpandsadiabatically,itmustdoworkagainsttheoutsideworld,and
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 125
thereforeitsenergygoesdown,whichisreflectedintheloweringofthetemperatureofthesystem.Anadiabaticexpansion
leadstoaloweringoftemperature,andanadiabaticcompressionleadstoanincreaseoftemperature.Wediscussadiabatic
expansion again inAdiabatic Processes for an ideal Gas.
Figure 3.11 An insulated piston with a hot, compressed gas is
released. The piston moves up, the volume expands, and the
pressure and temperature decrease. The internal energy goes into
work. If the expansion occurs within a time frame in which
negligible heat can enter the system, then the process is called
adiabatic. Ideally, during an adiabatic process no heat enters or
exits the system.
Cyclic Processes
Wesaythatasystemgoesthroughacyclicprocessifthestateofthesystemattheendissameasthestateatthebeginning.
Therefore,statepropertiessuchastemperature,pressure,volume,andinternalenergyofthesystemdonotchangeovera
complete cycle:
ΔE =0.
int
When the first law of thermodynamics is applied to a cyclic process, we obtain a simple relation between heat into the
system and the work done by the system over the cycle:
Q=W⎛cyclic process⎞.
⎝ ⎠
Thermodynamicprocessesarealsodistinguishedbywhetherornottheyarereversible.Areversibleprocessisonethatcan
bemadetoretraceitspathbydifferentialchangesintheenvironment.Suchaprocessmustthereforealsobequasi-static.
Note,however,thataquasi-staticprocessisnotnecessarilyreversible,sincetheremaybedissipativeforcesinvolved.For
example,iffrictionoccurredbetweenthepistonandthewallsofthecylindercontainingthegas,theenergylosttofriction
would prevent us from reproducing the original states of the system.
We considered several thermodynamic processes:
1. An isothermal process, during which the system’s temperature remains constant
2. An adiabatic process, during which no heat is transferred to or from the system
3. An isobaric process, during which the system’s pressure does not change
4. An isochoric process, during which the system’s volume does not change
Many other processes also occur that do not fit into any of these four categories.
Viewthissite(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21idegaspvdiag)tosetupyourownprocessinapVdiagram.
See if you can calculate the values predicted by the simulation for heat, work, and change in internal energy.