# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 288-294
############################################################

276 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
slows down.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.8
The snowboarder is now moving down a hill with incline . What is the snowboarder's acceleration?
6.3 Centripetal Force
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the equation for centripetal acceleration
• Apply Newton’s second law to develop the equation for centripetal force
• Use circular motion concepts in solving problems involving Newton’s laws of motion
In Motion in Two and Three Dimensions, we examined the basic concepts of circular motion. An object undergoing
circular motion, like one of the race cars shown at the beginning of this chapter, must be accelerating because it is
changing the direction of its velocity. We proved that this centrally directed acceleration, called centripetal
acceleration, is given by the formula
where v is the velocity of the object, directed along a tangent line to the curve at any instant. If we know the angular
velocity , then we can use
Angular velocity gives the rate at which the object is turning through the curve, in units of rad/s. This acceleration
acts along the radius of the curved path and is thus also referred to as a radial acceleration.
An acceleration must be produced by a force. Any force or combination of forces can cause a centripetal or radial
acceleration. Just a few examples are the tension in the rope on a tether ball, the force of Earth’s gravity on the
Moon, friction between roller skates and a rink floor, a banked roadway’s force on a car, and forces on the tube of a
spinning centrifuge. Any net force causing uniform circular motion is called a centripetal force. The direction of a
centripetal force is toward the center of curvature, the same as the direction of centripetal acceleration. According
to Newton’s second law of motion, net force is mass times acceleration: For uniform circular motion, the
acceleration is the centripetal acceleration:. Thus, the magnitude of centripetal force is
By substituting the expressions for centripetal acceleration we get two expressions for the
centripetal force in terms of mass, velocity, angular velocity, and radius of curvature:
6.3
You may use whichever expression for centripetal force is more convenient. Centripetal force is always
perpendicular to the path and points to the center of curvature, because is perpendicular to the velocity and
points to the center of curvature. Note that if you solve the first expression for r, you get
This implies that for a given mass and velocity, a large centripetal force causes a small radius of curvature—that is, a
tight curve, as in Figure 6.20.
Access for free at openstax.org

6.3 • Centripetal Force 277
FIGURE 6.20 The frictional force supplies the centripetal force and is numerically equal to it. Centripetal force is perpendicular to velocity
and causes uniform circular motion. The larger the the smaller the radius of curvature r and the sharper the curve. The second curve
has the same v, but a larger produces a smaller r′.
EXAMPLE 6.15
What Coefficient of Friction Do Cars Need on a Flat Curve?
(a) Calculate the centripetal force exerted on a 900.0-kg car that negotiates a 500.0-m radius curve at 25.00 m/s.
(b) Assuming an unbanked curve, find the minimum static coefficient of friction between the tires and the road,
static friction being the reason that keeps the car from slipping (Figure 6.21).
FIGURE 6.21 This car on level ground is moving away and turning to the left. The centripetal force causing the car to turn in a circular path
is due to friction between the tires and the road. A minimum coefficient of friction is needed, or the car will move in a larger-radius curve
and leave the roadway.

278 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Strategy
a. We know that Thus,
b. Figure 6.21 shows the forces acting on the car on an unbanked (level ground) curve. Friction is to the left,
keeping the car from slipping, and because it is the only horizontal force acting on the car, the friction is the
centripetal force in this case. We know that the maximum static friction (at which the tires roll but do not slip)
is where is the static coefficient of friction and N is the normal force. The normal force equals the
car’s weight on level ground, so Thus the centripetal force in this situation is
Now we have a relationship between centripetal force and the coefficient of friction. Using the equation
we obtain
We solve this for noting that mass cancels, and obtain
Substituting the knowns,
(Because coefficients of friction are approximate, the answer is given to only two digits.)
Significance
The coefficient of friction found in Figure 6.21(b) is much smaller than is typically found between tires and roads.
The car still negotiates the curve if the coefficient is greater than 0.13, because static friction is a responsive force,
able to assume a value less than but no more than A higher coefficient would also allow the car to negotiate
the curve at a higher speed, but if the coefficient of friction is less, the safe speed would be less than 25 m/s. Note
that mass cancels, implying that, in this example, it does not matter how heavily loaded the car is to negotiate the
turn. Mass cancels because friction is assumed proportional to the normal force, which in turn is proportional to
mass. If the surface of the road were banked, the normal force would be greater, as discussed next.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.9
A car moving at 96.8 km/h travels around a circular curve of radius 182.9 m on a flat country road. What must be the
minimum coefficient of static friction to keep the car from slipping?
Banked Curves
Let us now consider banked curves, where the slope of the road helps you negotiate the curve (Figure 6.22). The
greater the angle , the faster you can take the curve. Race tracks for bikes as well as cars, for example, often have
steeply banked curves. In an “ideally banked curve,” the angle is such that you can negotiate the curve at a certain
speed without the aid of friction between the tires and the road. We will derive an expression for for an ideally
banked curve and consider an example related to it.
Access for free at openstax.org

6.3 • Centripetal Force 279
FIGURE 6.22 The car on this banked curve is moving away and turning to the left.
For ideal banking, the net external force equals the horizontal centripetal force in the absence of friction. The
components of the normal force N in the horizontal and vertical directions must equal the centripetal force and the
weight of the car, respectively. In cases in which forces are not parallel, it is most convenient to consider
components along perpendicular axes—in this case, the vertical and horizontal directions.
Figure 6.22 shows a free-body diagram for a car on a frictionless banked curve. If the angle is ideal for the speed
and radius, then the net external force equals the necessary centripetal force. The only two external forces acting on
the car are its weight and the normal force of the road (A frictionless surface can only exert a force
perpendicular to the surface—that is, a normal force.) These two forces must add to give a net external force that is
horizontal toward the center of curvature and has magnitude Because this is the crucial force and it is
horizontal, we use a coordinate system with vertical and horizontal axes. Only the normal force has a horizontal
component, so this must equal the centripetal force, that is,
Because the car does not leave the surface of the road, the net vertical force must be zero, meaning that the vertical
components of the two external forces must be equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. From Figure 6.22, we
see that the vertical component of the normal force is and the only other vertical force is the car’s weight.
These must be equal in magnitude; thus,
Now we can combine these two equations to eliminate N and get an expression for , as desired. Solving the second
equation for and substituting this into the first yields
Taking the inverse tangent gives
6.4
This expression can be understood by considering how depends on v and r. A large is obtained for a large v and a
small r. That is, roads must be steeply banked for high speeds and sharp curves. Friction helps, because it allows
you to take the curve at greater or lower speed than if the curve were frictionless. Note that does not depend on
the mass of the vehicle.

280 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
EXAMPLE 6.16
What Is the Ideal Speed to Take a Steeply Banked Tight Curve?
Curves on some test tracks and race courses, such as Daytona International Speedway in Florida, are very steeply
banked. This banking, with the aid of tire friction and very stable car configurations, allows the curves to be taken at
very high speed. To illustrate, calculate the speed at which a 100.0-m radius curve banked at should be driven
if the road were frictionless.
Strategy
We first note that all terms in the expression for the ideal angle of a banked curve except for speed are known; thus,
we need only rearrange it so that speed appears on the left-hand side and then substitute known quantities.
Solution
Starting with
we get
Noting that we obtain
Significance
This is just about 87.5 km/h, consistent with a very steeply banked and rather sharp curve. Tire friction enables a
vehicle to take the curve at significantly higher speeds.
Airplanes also make turns by banking. The lift force, due to the force of the air on the wing, acts at right angles to the
wing. When the airplane banks, the pilot is obtaining greater lift than necessary for level flight. The vertical
component of lift balances the airplane’s weight, and the horizontal component accelerates the plane. The banking
angle shown in Figure 6.23 is given by . We analyze the forces in the same way we treat the case of the car
rounding a banked curve.
FIGURE 6.23 In a banked turn, the horizontal component of lift is unbalanced and accelerates the plane. The normal component of lift
balances the plane’s weight. The banking angle is given by . Compare the vector diagram with that shown in Figure 6.22.
Access for free at openstax.org

6.3 • Centripetal Force 281
INTERACTIVE
Join the ladybug (https://openstax.org/l/21ladybug_es) in an exploration of rotational motion. Rotate the merry-go-
round to change its angle or choose a constant angular velocity or angular acceleration. Explore how circular motion
relates to the bug’s xy-position, velocity, and acceleration using vectors or graphs.
INTERACTIVE
A circular motion requires a force, the so-called centripetal force, which is directed to the axis of rotation. This
simplified model of a carousel (https://openstax.org/l/21carousel) demonstrates this force.
Inertial Forces and Noninertial (Accelerated) Frames: The Coriolis Force
What do taking off in a jet airplane, turning a corner in a car, riding a merry-go-round, and the circular motion of a
tropical cyclone have in common? Each exhibits inertial forces—fictitious forces that merely seem to arise from
motion, because the observer’s frame of reference is accelerating or rotating. When taking off in a jet, most people
would agree it feels as if you are being pushed back into the seat as the airplane accelerates down the runway. Yet a
physicist would say that you tend to remain stationary while the seat pushes forward on you. An even more common
experience occurs when you make a tight curve in your car—say, to the right (Figure 6.24). You feel as if you are
thrown (that is, forced) toward the left relative to the car. Again, a physicist would say that you are going in a straight
line (recall Newton’s first law) but the car moves to the right, not that you are experiencing a force from the left.
FIGURE 6.24 (a) The car driver feels herself forced to the left relative to the car when she makes a right turn. This is a fictitious inertial force
arising from the use of the car as a frame of reference. (b) In Earth’s frame of reference, the driver moves in a straight line, obeying
Newton’s first law, and the car moves to the right. There is no force to the left on the driver relative to Earth. Instead, there is a force to the
right on the car to make it turn.
We can reconcile these points of view by examining the frames of reference used. Let us concentrate on people in a
car. Passengers instinctively use the car as a frame of reference, whereas a physicist might use Earth. The physicist
might make this choice because Earth is nearly an inertial frame of reference, in which all forces have an identifiable
physical origin. In such a frame of reference, Newton’s laws of motion take the form given in Newton’s Laws of
Motion. The car is a noninertial frame of reference because it is accelerated to the side. The force to the left sensed
by car passengers is an inertial force having no physical origin (it is due purely to the inertia of the passenger, not to
some physical cause such as tension, friction, or gravitation). The car, as well as the driver, is actually accelerating to
the right.
A physicist will choose whatever reference frame is most convenient for the situation being analyzed. There is no
problem to a physicist in including inertial forces and Newton’s second law, as usual, if that is more convenient, for