# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 477-483
############################################################

10.3 • Relating Angular and Translational Quantities 465
FIGURE 10.13 The area under the curve is the area of the right triangle.
We verify the solution using Equation 10.12:
Setting , we have
This verifies the solution found from finding the area under the curve.
Significance
We see from part (b) that there are alternative approaches to analyzing fixed-axis rotation with constant
acceleration. We started with a graphical approach and verified the solution using the rotational kinematic
equations. Since , we could do the same graphical analysis on an angular acceleration-vs.-time curve. The
area under an curve gives us the change in angular velocity. Since the angular acceleration is constant in this
section, this is a straightforward exercise.
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Given the linear kinematic equation, write the corresponding rotational kinematic equation
• Calculate the linear distances, velocities, and accelerations of points on a rotating system given the
angular velocities and accelerations
In this section, we relate each of the rotational variables to the translational variables defined in Motion Along a
Straight Line and Motion in Two and Three Dimensions. This will complete our ability to describe rigid-body
rotations.
Angular vs. Linear Variables
In Rotational Variables, we introduced angular variables. If we compare the rotational definitions with the
definitions of linear kinematic variables from Motion Along a Straight Line and Motion in Two and Three Dimensions,
we find that there is a mapping of the linear variables to the rotational ones. Linear position, velocity, and
acceleration have their rotational counterparts, as we can see when we write them side by side:

466 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
Linear Rotational
Position x
Velocity
Acceleration
Let’s compare the linear and rotational variables individually. The linear variable of position has physical units of
meters, whereas the angular position variable has dimensionless units of radians, as can be seen from the definition
of , which is the ratio of two lengths. The linear velocity has units of m/s, and its counterpart, the angular
velocity, has units of rad/s. In Rotational Variables, we saw in the case of circular motion that the linear tangential
speed of a particle at a radius r from the axis of rotation is related to the angular velocity by the relation .
This could also apply to points on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis. Here, we consider only circular motion. In
circular motion, both uniform and nonuniform, there exists a centripetal acceleration (Motion in Two and Three
Dimensions). The centripetal acceleration vector points inward from the particle executing circular motion toward
the axis of rotation. The derivation of the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration is given in Motion in Two and
Three Dimensions. From that derivation, the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration was found to be
10.14
where r is the radius of the circle.
Thus, in uniform circular motion when the angular velocity is constant and the angular acceleration is zero, we have
a linear acceleration—that is, centripetal acceleration—since the tangential speed in Equation 10.14 is a constant. If
nonuniform circular motion is present, the rotating system has an angular acceleration, and we have both a linear
centripetal acceleration that is changing (because is changing) as well as a linear tangential acceleration. These
relationships are shown in Figure 10.14, where we show the centripetal and tangential accelerations for uniform
and nonuniform circular motion.
FIGURE 10.14 (a) Uniform circular motion: The centripetal acceleration has its vector inward toward the axis of rotation. There is no
tangential acceleration. (b) Nonuniform circular motion: An angular acceleration produces an inward centripetal acceleration that is
changing in magnitude, plus a tangential acceleration .
The centripetal acceleration is due to the change in the direction of tangential velocity, whereas the tangential
Access for free at openstax.org

10.3 • Relating Angular and Translational Quantities 467
acceleration is due to any change in the magnitude of the tangential velocity. The tangential and centripetal
acceleration vectors and are always perpendicular to each other, as seen in Figure 10.14. To complete this
description, we can assign a total linear acceleration vector to a point on a rotating rigid body or a particle
executing circular motion at a radius r from a fixed axis. The total linear acceleration vector is the vector sum of
the centripetal and tangential accelerations,
10.15
The total linear acceleration vector in the case of nonuniform circular motion points at an angle between the
centripetal and tangential acceleration vectors, as shown in Figure 10.15. Since , the magnitude of the total
linear acceleration is
Note that if the angular acceleration is zero, the total linear acceleration is equal to the centripetal acceleration.
FIGURE 10.15 A particle is executing circular motion and has an angular acceleration. The total linear acceleration of the particle is the
vector sum of the centripetal acceleration and tangential acceleration vectors. The total linear acceleration vector is at an angle in between
the centripetal and tangential accelerations.
Relationships between Rotational and Translational Motion
We can look at two relationships between rotational and translational motion.
1. Generally speaking, the linear kinematic equations have their rotational counterparts. Table 10.2 lists the four
linear kinematic equations and the corresponding rotational counterpart. The two sets of equations look
similar to each other, but describe two different physical situations, that is, rotation and translation.
Rotational Translational
TABLE 10.2 Rotational and Translational Kinematic
Equations
2. The second correspondence has to do with relating linear and rotational variables in the special case of
circular motion. This is shown in Table 10.3, where in the third column, we have listed the connecting equation
that relates the linear variable to the rotational variable. The rotational variables of angular velocity and

468 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
acceleration have subscripts that indicate their definition in circular motion.
Rotational Translational Relationship ( )
s
TABLE 10.3 Rotational and Translational Quantities: Circular Motion
EXAMPLE 10.7
Linear Acceleration of a Centrifuge
A centrifuge has a radius of 20 cm and accelerates from a maximum rotation rate of 10,000 rpm to rest in 30
seconds under a constant angular acceleration. It is rotating counterclockwise. What is the magnitude of the total
acceleration of a point at the tip of the centrifuge at What is the direction of the total acceleration vector?
Strategy
With the information given, we can calculate the angular acceleration, which then will allow us to find the tangential
acceleration. We can find the centripetal acceleration at by calculating the tangential speed at this time. With
the magnitudes of the accelerations, we can calculate the total linear acceleration. From the description of the
rotation in the problem, we can sketch the direction of the total acceleration vector.
Solution
The angular acceleration is
Therefore, the tangential acceleration is
The angular velocity at is
Thus, the tangential speed at is
We can now calculate the centripetal acceleration at :
Since the two acceleration vectors are perpendicular to each other, the magnitude of the total linear acceleration is
Since the centrifuge has a negative angular acceleration, it is slowing down. The total acceleration vector is as
shown in Figure 10.16. The angle with respect to the centripetal acceleration vector is
Access for free at openstax.org

10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 469
The negative sign means that the total acceleration vector is angled toward the clockwise direction.
FIGURE 10.16 The centripetal, tangential, and total acceleration vectors. The centrifuge is slowing down, so the tangential acceleration is
clockwise, opposite the direction of rotation (counterclockwise).
Significance
From Figure 10.16, we see that the tangential acceleration vector is opposite the direction of rotation. The
magnitude of the tangential acceleration is much smaller than the centripetal acceleration, so the total linear
acceleration vector will make a very small angle with respect to the centripetal acceleration vector.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.3
A boy jumps on a merry-go-round with a radius of 5 m that is at rest. It starts accelerating at a constant rate up to an
angular velocity of 5 rad/s in 20 seconds. What is the distance travelled by the boy?
INTERACTIVE
Check out this PhET simulation (https://openstax.org/l/28ladybugrevolutionrotation) to change the parameters of a
rotating disk (the initial angle, angular velocity, and angular acceleration), and place bugs at different radial
distances from the axis. The simulation then lets you explore how circular motion relates to the bugs’ xy-position,
velocity, and acceleration using vectors or graphs.
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the differences between rotational and translational kinetic energy
• Define the physical concept of moment of inertia in terms of the mass distribution from the rotational axis
• Explain how the moment of inertia of rigid bodies affects their rotational kinetic energy
• Use conservation of mechanical energy to analyze systems undergoing both rotation and translation
• Calculate the angular velocity of a rotating system when there are energy losses due to nonconservative
forces
So far in this chapter, we have been working with rotational kinematics: the description of motion for a rotating rigid
body with a fixed axis of rotation. In this section, we define two new quantities that are helpful for analyzing
properties of rotating objects: moment of inertia and rotational kinetic energy. With these properties defined, we will

470 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
have two important tools we need for analyzing rotational dynamics.
Rotational Kinetic Energy
Any moving object has kinetic energy. We know how to calculate this for a body undergoing translational motion, but
how about for a rigid body undergoing rotation? This might seem complicated because each point on the rigid body
has a different velocity. However, we can make use of angular velocity—which is the same for the entire rigid
body—to express the kinetic energy for a rotating object. Figure 10.17 shows an example of a very energetic rotating
body: an electric grindstone propelled by a motor. Sparks are flying, and noise and vibration are generated as the
grindstone does its work. This system has considerable energy, some of it in the form of heat, light, sound, and
vibration. However, most of this energy is in the form of rotational kinetic energy.
FIGURE 10.17 The rotational kinetic energy of the grindstone is converted to heat, light, sound, and vibration. (credit: Zachary David Bell,
US Navy)
Energy in rotational motion is not a new form of energy; rather, it is the energy associated with rotational motion, the
same as kinetic energy in translational motion. However, because kinetic energy is given by , and
velocity is a quantity that is different for every point on a rotating body about an axis, it makes sense to find a way to
write kinetic energy in terms of the variable , which is the same for all points on a rigid rotating body. For a single
particle rotating around a fixed axis, this is straightforward to calculate. We can relate the angular velocity to the
magnitude of the translational velocity using the relation , where r is the distance of the particle from the
axis of rotation and is its tangential speed. Substituting into the equation for kinetic energy, we find
In the case of a rigid rotating body, we can divide up any body into a large number of smaller masses, each with a
mass and distance to the axis of rotation , such that the total mass of the body is equal to the sum of the
individual masses: . Each smaller mass has tangential speed , where we have dropped the subscript t
for the moment. The total kinetic energy of the rigid rotating body is
and since for all masses,
Access for free at openstax.org