# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 185-194
############################################################

4.4 • Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion 173
Object Centripetal Acceleration (m/s2 or factors of g)
Satellite in geosynchronous orbit 0.233
Outer edge of a CD when playing
Jet in a barrel roll (2–3 g)
Roller coaster (5 g)
Electron orbiting a proton in a simple Bohr model of the atom
TABLE 4.1 Typical Centripetal Accelerations
Equations of Motion for Uniform Circular Motion
A particle executing circular motion can be described by its position vector Figure 4.20 shows a particle
executing circular motion in a counterclockwise direction. As the particle moves on the circle, its position vector
sweeps out the angle with the x-axis. Vector making an angle with the x-axis is shown with its components
along the x- and y-axes. The magnitude of the position vector is and is also the radius of the circle, so that
in terms of its components,
4.28
Here, is a constant called the angular frequency of the particle. The angular frequency has units of radians (rad)
per second and is simply the number of radians of angular measure through which the particle passes per second.
The angle that the position vector has at any particular time is .
If T is the period of motion, or the time to complete one revolution ( rad), then
FIGURE 4.20 The position vector for a particle in circular motion with its components along the x- and y-axes. The particle moves
counterclockwise. Angle is the angular frequency in radians per second multiplied by t.
Velocity and acceleration can be obtained from the position function by differentiation:
4.29
It can be shown from Figure 4.20 that the velocity vector is tangential to the circle at the location of the particle,
with magnitude Similarly, the acceleration vector is found by differentiating the velocity:

174 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
4.30
From this equation we see that the acceleration vector has magnitude and is directed opposite the position
vector, toward the origin, because
EXAMPLE 4.11
Circular Motion of a Proton
A proton has speed and is moving in a circle in the xy plane of radius r = 0.175 m. What is its position
in the xy plane at time At t = 0, the position of the proton is and it circles
counterclockwise. Sketch the trajectory.
Solution
According to Equation 3.5,
Since the period T is the time it takes an object to go once around a circle, and the distance around a circle is 2πr, we
have:
From the given data, the proton has period and angular frequency:
The position of the particle at with A = 0.175 m is
From this result we see that the proton is located slightly below the x-axis. This is shown in Figure 4.21.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.4 • Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion 175
FIGURE 4.21 Position vector of the proton at The trajectory of the proton is shown. The angle through which
the proton travels along the circle is 5.712 rad, which a little less than one complete revolution.
Significance
We picked the initial position of the particle to be on the x-axis. This was completely arbitrary. If a different starting
position were given, we would have a different final position at t = 200 ns.
Nonuniform Circular Motion
Circular motion does not have to be at a constant speed. A particle can travel in a circle and speed up or slow down,
showing an acceleration in the direction of the motion.
In uniform circular motion, the particle executing circular motion has a constant speed and the circle is at a fixed
radius. If the speed of the particle is changing as well, then we introduce an additional acceleration in the direction
tangential to the circle. Such accelerations occur at a point on a top that is changing its spin rate, or any accelerating
rotor. In Displacement and Velocity Vectors we showed that centripetal acceleration is the time rate of change of the
direction of the velocity vector. If the speed of the particle is changing, then it has a tangential acceleration that is
the time rate of change of the magnitude of the velocity:
4.31
The direction of tangential acceleration is tangent to the circle whereas the direction of centripetal acceleration is
radially inward toward the center of the circle. Thus, a particle in circular motion with a tangential acceleration has a
total acceleration that is the vector sum of the centripetal and tangential accelerations:
4.32
The acceleration vectors are shown in Figure 4.22. Note that the two acceleration vectors and are
perpendicular to each other, with in the radial direction and in the tangential direction. The total acceleration
points at an angle between and

176 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.22 The centripetal acceleration points toward the center of the circle. The tangential acceleration is tangential to the circle at the
particle’s position. The total acceleration is the vector sum of the tangential and centripetal accelerations, which are perpendicular.
EXAMPLE 4.12
Total Acceleration during Circular Motion
A particle moves in a circle of radius r = 2.0 m. During the time interval from t = 1.5 s to t = 4.0 s its speed varies with
time according to
What is the total acceleration of the particle at t = 2.0 s?
Strategy
We are given the speed of the particle and the radius of the circle, so we can calculate centripetal acceleration
easily. The direction of the centripetal acceleration is toward the center of the circle. We find the magnitude of the
tangential acceleration by taking the derivative with respect to time of using Equation 4.31 and evaluating it at
t = 2.0 s. We use this and the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration to find the total acceleration.
Solution
Centripetal acceleration is
directed toward the center of the circle. Tangential acceleration is
Total acceleration is
and from the tangent to the circle. See Figure 4.23.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.5 • Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions 177
FIGURE 4.23 The tangential and centripetal acceleration vectors. The net acceleration is the vector sum of the two accelerations.
Significance
The directions of centripetal and tangential accelerations can be described more conveniently in terms of a polar
coordinate system, with unit vectors in the radial and tangential directions. This coordinate system, which is used for
motion along curved paths, is discussed in detail later in the book.
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of reference frames.
• Write the position and velocity vector equations for relative motion.
• Draw the position and velocity vectors for relative motion.
• Analyze one-dimensional and two-dimensional relative motion problems using the position and velocity
vector equations.
Motion does not happen in isolation. If you’re riding in a train moving at 10 m/s east, this velocity is measured
relative to the ground on which you’re traveling. However, if another train passes you at 15 m/s east, your velocity
relative to this other train is different from your velocity relative to the ground. Your velocity relative to the other
train is 5 m/s west. To explore this idea further, we first need to establish some terminology.
Reference Frames
To discuss relative motion in one or more dimensions, we first introduce the concept of reference frames. When we
say an object has a certain velocity, we must state it has a velocity with respect to a given reference frame. In most
examples we have examined so far, this reference frame has been Earth. If you say a person is sitting in a train
moving at 10 m/s east, then you imply the person on the train is moving relative to the surface of Earth at this
velocity, and Earth is the reference frame. We can expand our view of the motion of the person on the train and say
Earth is spinning in its orbit around the Sun, in which case the motion becomes more complicated. In this case, the
solar system is the reference frame. In summary, all discussion of relative motion must define the reference frames
involved. We now develop a method to refer to reference frames in relative motion. This method makes an
approximation that breaks down near the speed of light, where the more accurate methods or special relativity are
needed, but is extremely accurate for everyday speeds (Relativity (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-
volume-3/pages/5-introduction)).
Relative Motion in One Dimension
We introduce relative motion in one dimension first, because the velocity vectors simplify to having only two
possible directions. Take the example of the person sitting in a train moving east. If we choose east as the positive
direction and Earth as the reference frame, then we can write the velocity of the train with respect to the Earth as
east, where the subscripts TE refer to train and Earth. Let’s now say the person gets up out of her
seat and walks toward the back of the train at 2 m/s. This tells us she has a velocity relative to the reference frame

178 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
of the train. Since the person is walking west, in the negative direction, we write her velocity with respect to the train
as We can add the two velocity vectors to find the velocity of the person with respect to Earth. This
relative velocity is written as
4.33
Note the ordering of the subscripts for the various reference frames in Equation 4.33. The subscripts for the
coupling reference frame, which is the train, appear consecutively in the right-hand side of the equation. Figure 4.24
shows the correct order of subscripts when forming the vector equation.
FIGURE 4.24 When constructing the vector equation, the subscripts for the coupling reference frame appear consecutively on the inside.
The subscripts on the left-hand side of the equation are the same as the two outside subscripts on the right-hand side of the equation.
Adding the vectors, we find so the person is moving 8 m/s east with respect to Earth. Graphically,
this is shown in Figure 4.25.
FIGURE 4.25 Velocity vectors of the train with respect to Earth, person with respect to the train, and person with respect to Earth.
Relative Velocity in Two Dimensions
We can now apply these concepts to describing motion in two dimensions. Consider a particle P and reference
frames S and as shown in Figure 4.26. The position of the origin of as measured in S is the position of P
as measured in is and the position of P as measured in S is
FIGURE 4.26 The positions of particle P relative to frames S and are and respectively.
From Figure 4.26 we see that
4.34
The relative velocities are the time derivatives of the position vectors. Therefore,
4.35
The velocity of a particle relative to S is equal to its velocity relative to plus the velocity of relative to S.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.5 • Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions 179
We can extend Equation 4.35 to any number of reference frames. For particle P with velocities
in frames A, B, and C,
4.36
We can also see how the accelerations are related as observed in two reference frames by differentiating Equation
4.35:
4.37
We see that if the velocity of relative to S is a constant, then and
4.38
This says the acceleration of a particle is the same as measured by two observers moving at a constant velocity
relative to each other.
EXAMPLE 4.13
Motion of a Car Relative to a Truck
A truck is traveling south at a speed of 70 km/h toward an intersection. A car is traveling east toward the
intersection at a speed of 80 km/h (Figure 4.27). What is the velocity of the car relative to the truck?
FIGURE 4.27 A car travels east toward an intersection while a truck travels south toward the same intersection.
Strategy
First, we must establish the reference frame common to both vehicles, which is Earth. Then, we write the velocities
of each with respect to the reference frame of Earth, which enables us to form a vector equation that links the car,
the truck, and Earth to solve for the velocity of the car with respect to the truck.
Solution
The velocity of the car with respect to Earth is The velocity of the truck with respect to Earth is
Using the velocity addition rule, the relative motion equation we are seeking is

180 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
Here, is the velocity of the car with respect to the truck, and Earth is the connecting reference frame. Since we
have the velocity of the truck with respect to Earth, the negative of this vector is the velocity of Earth with respect to
the truck: The vector diagram of this equation is shown in Figure 4.28.
FIGURE 4.28 Vector diagram of the vector equation .
We can now solve for the velocity of the car with respect to the truck:
and
Significance
Drawing a vector diagram showing the velocity vectors can help in understanding the relative velocity of the two
objects.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.6
A boat heads due north, moving at 4.5 m/s relative to the water of a river that is running east at 3.0 m/s. What is the
velocity of the boat with respect to Earth?
EXAMPLE 4.14
Flying a Plane in a Wind
A pilot must fly a plane due north to reach their destination. The plane can fly at 300 km/h in still air. A wind is
blowing out of the northeast at 90 km/h. (a) In what direction must the pilot head the plane to fly due north? (b)
What is the speed of the plane relative to the ground?
Strategy
The pilot must point the plane somewhat east of north to compensate for the wind velocity. We need to construct a
vector equation that contains the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground, the velocity of the plane with
respect to the air, and the velocity of the air with respect to the ground. Since these last two quantities are known,
we can solve for the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground. We can graph the vectors and use this diagram
to evaluate the magnitude of the plane’s velocity with respect to the ground. The diagram will also tell us the angle
the plane’s velocity makes with north with respect to the air, which is the direction the pilot must head the plane.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.5 • Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions 181
Solution
The vector equation is where P = plane, A = air, and G = ground. From the geometry in Figure
4.29, we can solve easily for the magnitude of the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground and the angle of
the plane’s heading,
FIGURE 4.29 Vector diagram for Equation 4.34 showing the vectors
Known quantities:
(a) In the x direction we have the following:
•
•
• east of north
(b) In the y direction we have the following:
•
•
•