# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 195-200
############################################################

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 185
Figure 5.6 A Leyden jar (an early version of what is now
called a capacitor) allowed experimenters to store large amounts
of electric charge. Benjamin Franklin used such a jar to
demonstrate that lightning behaved exactly like the electricity he
got from the equipment in his laboratory.
Franklin pointed out that the observed behavior could be explained by supposing that one of the two types of charge
remainedmotionless,whiletheothertypeofchargeflowedfromonepieceoffoiltotheother.Hefurthersuggestedthat
anexcessofwhathecalledthis“electricalfluid”becalled“positiveelectricity”andthedeficiencyofitbecalled“negative
electricity.”Hissuggestion,withsomeminormodifications,isthemodelweusetoday.(Withtheexperimentsthathewas
abletodo,thiswasapureguess;hehadnowayofactuallydeterminingthesignofthemovingcharge.Unfortunately,he
guessed wrong; we now know that the charges that flow are the ones Franklin labeled negative, and the positive charges
remainlargelymotionless.Fortunately,aswe’llsee,itmakesnopracticalortheoreticaldifferencewhichchoicewemake,
as long as we stay consistent with our choice.)
Let’s list the specific observations that we have of thiselectric force:
• The force acts without physical contact between the two objects.
• Theforcecanbeeitherattractiveorrepulsive:Iftwointeractingobjectscarrythesamesignofcharge,theforceis
repulsive;ifthechargesareofoppositesign,theforceisattractive.Theseinteractionsarereferredtoaselectrostatic
repulsionandelectrostatic attraction, respectively.
• Not all objects are affected by this force.
• The magnitude of the force decreases (rapidly) with increasing separation distance between the objects.
Tobemoreprecise,wefindexperimentallythatthemagnitudeoftheforcedecreasesasthesquareofthedistancebetween
thetwointeractingobjectsincreases.Thus,forexample,whenthedistancebetweentwointeractingobjectsisdoubled,the
forcebetweenthemdecreasestoonefourthwhatitwasintheoriginalsystem.Wecanalsoobservethatthesurroundingsof
the charged objects affect the magnitude of the force. However, we will explore this issue in a later chapter.
Properties of Electric Charge
In addition to the existence of two types of charge, several other properties of charge have been discovered.

186 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
• Chargeisquantized.Thismeansthatelectricchargecomesindiscreteamounts,andthereisasmallestpossible
amountofchargethatanobjectcanhave.IntheSIsystem,thissmallestamountis e≡1.602×10 −19 C.Nofree
particle canhavelesschargethanthis,and,therefore, thechargeonanyobject—the chargeonallobjects—must
beanintegermultipleofthisamount.Allmacroscopic,chargedobjectshavechargebecauseelectronshaveeither
been added or taken away from them, resulting in a net charge.
• The magnitude of the charge is independent of the type. Phrased another way, the smallest possible positive
charge (to four significant figures) is +1.602×10 −19 C, and the smallest possible negative charge is
−1.602×10 −19 C;thesevaluesareexactlyequal.Thisissimplyhowthelawsofphysicsinouruniverseturned
out.
• Chargeisconserved.Chargecanneitherbecreatednordestroyed;itcanonlybetransferredfromplacetoplace,
fromoneobjecttoanother.Frequently,wespeakoftwocharges“canceling”;thisisverbalshorthand.Itmeansthat
iftwoobjectsthathaveequalandoppositechargesarephysicallyclosetoeachother,thenthe(oppositelydirected)
forcestheyapplyonsomeotherchargedobjectcancel,foranetforceofzero.Itisimportantthatyouunderstand
that the charges on the objects by no means disappear, however. The net charge of the universe is constant.
• Charge is conserved in closed systems. In principle, if a negative charge disappeared from your lab bench and
reappearedontheMoon,conservationofchargewouldstillhold.However,thisneverhappens.Ifthetotalcharge
youhaveinyourlocalsystemonyourlabbenchischanging,therewillbeameasurableflowofchargeintoorout
ofthesystem.Again,chargescananddomovearound,andtheireffectscananddocancel,butthenetchargein
yourlocalenvironment(ifclosed)isconserved.Thelasttwoitemsarebothreferredtoasthelawofconservation
of charge.
The Source of Charges: The Structure of the Atom
Onceitbecameclearthatallmatterwascomposedofparticlesthatcametobecalledatoms,italsoquicklybecameclearthat
theconstituentsoftheatomincludedbothpositivelychargedparticlesandnegativelychargedparticles.Thenextquestion
was, what are the physical properties of those electrically charged particles?
Thenegativelychargedparticlewasthefirstonetobediscovered.In1897,theEnglishphysicistJ.J.Thomsonwasstudying
what was then known as cathode rays. Some years before, the English physicist William Crookes had shown that these
“rays” were negatively charged, but his experiments were unable to tell any more than that. (The fact that they carried a
negativeelectricchargewasstrongevidencethatthesewerenotraysatall,butparticles.)Thomsonpreparedapurebeamof
theseparticlesandsentthemthroughcrossedelectricandmagneticfields,andadjustedthevariousfieldstrengthsuntilthe
netdeflectionofthebeamwaszero.Withthisexperiment,hewasabletodeterminethecharge-to-massratiooftheparticle.
Thisratioshowedthatthemassoftheparticlewasmuchsmallerthanthatofanyotherpreviouslyknownparticle—1837
times smaller, in fact. Eventually, this particle came to be called theelectron.
Sincetheatomasawholeiselectricallyneutral,thenextquestionwastodeterminehowthepositiveandnegativecharges
are distributed within the atom. Thomson himself imagined that his electrons were embedded within a sort of positively
charged paste, smeared out throughout the volume of the atom. However, in 1908, the New Zealand physicist Ernest
Rutherford showed that the positive charges of the atom existed within a tiny core—called a nucleus—that took up only
a very tiny fraction of the overall volume of the atom, but held over 99% of the mass. (See Linear Momentum and
Collisions (http://cnx.org/content/m58317/latest/) .) In addition, he showed that the negatively charged electrons
perpetuallyorbitedaboutthisnucleus,formingasortofelectricallychargedcloudthatsurroundsthenucleus(Figure5.7).
Rutherford concluded that the nucleus was constructed of small, massive particles that he namedprotons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 187
Figure 5.7 This simplified model of a hydrogen atom shows a
positively charged nucleus (consisting, in the case of hydrogen, of a
single proton), surrounded by an electron “cloud.” The charge of the
electron cloud is equal (and opposite in sign) to the charge of the
nucleus, but the electron does not have a definite location in space;
hence, its representation here is as a cloud. Normal macroscopic
amounts of matter contain immense numbers of atoms and
molecules, and, hence, even greater numbers of individual negative
and positive charges.
Since it was known that different atoms have different masses, and that ordinarily atoms are electrically neutral, it was
natural to suppose that different atoms have different numbers of protons in their nucleus, with an equal number of
negatively charged electrons orbiting about the positively charged nucleus, thus making the atoms overall electrically
neutral.However,itwassoondiscoveredthatalthoughthelightestatom,hydrogen,didindeedhaveasingleprotonasits
nucleus, the next heaviest atom—helium—has twice the number of protons (two), butfourtimes the mass of hydrogen.
This mystery was resolved in 1932 by the English physicist James Chadwick, with the discovery of the neutron. The
neutronis,essentially,anelectricallyneutraltwinoftheproton,withnoelectriccharge,but(nearly)identicalmasstothe
proton. The helium nucleus therefore has two neutrons along with its two protons. (Later experiments were to show that
although the neutron is electrically neutral overall, it does have an internal charge structure. Furthermore, although the
massesoftheneutronandtheprotonarenearlyequal,theyaren’texactlyequal:Theneutron’smassisveryslightlylarger
thanthemassoftheproton.Thatslightmassexcessturnedouttobeofgreatimportance.That,however,isastorythatwill
have to wait until our study of modern physics inNuclear Physics (http://cnx.org/content/m58606/latest/).)
Thus,in1932,thepictureoftheatomwasofasmall,massivenucleusconstructedofacombinationofprotonsandneutrons,
surrounded by a collection of electrons whose combined motion formed a sort of negatively charged “cloud” around the
nucleus(Figure5.8).Inanelectricallyneutralatom,thetotalnegativechargeofthecollectionofelectronsisequaltothe
totalpositivechargeinthenucleus.Theverylow-masselectronscanbemoreorlesseasilyremovedoraddedtoanatom,
changingthenetchargeontheatom(thoughwithoutchangingitstype).Anatomthathashadthechargealteredinthisway
iscalledanion.Positiveionshavehadelectronsremoved,whereasnegativeionshavehadexcesselectronsadded.Wealso
use this term to describe molecules that are not electrically neutral.

188 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
Figure 5.8 The nucleus of a carbon atom is composed of six
protons and six neutrons. As in hydrogen, the surrounding six
electrons do not have definite locations and so can be considered to
be a sort of cloud surrounding the nucleus.
Thestoryoftheatomdoesnotstopthere,however.Inthelatterpartofthetwentiethcentury,manymoresubatomicparticles
werediscoveredinthenucleusoftheatom:pions,neutrinos,andquarks,amongothers.Withtheexceptionofthephoton,
noneoftheseparticlesaredirectlyrelevanttothestudyofelectromagnetism,sowedeferfurtherdiscussionofthemuntil
the chapter on particle physics (Particle Physics and Cosmology (http://cnx.org/content/m58767/latest/)).
A Note on Terminology
As noted previously, electric charge is a property that an object can have. This is similar to how an object can have a
propertythatwecallmass,apropertythatwecalldensity,apropertythatwecalltemperature,andsoon.Technically,we
shouldalwayssaysomethinglike,“Supposewehaveaparticlethatcarriesachargeof 3µC.”However,itisverycommon
tosayinstead,“Supposewehavea 3-µC charge.”Similarly,weoftensaysomethinglike,“Sixchargesarelocatedatthe
verticesofaregularhexagon.”Achargeisnotaparticle;rather,itisapropertyofaparticle.Nevertheless,thisterminology
isextremelycommon(andisfrequentlyusedinthisbook,asitiseverywhereelse).So,keepinthebackofyourmindwhat
we really mean when we refer to a “charge.”
5.2 | Conductors, Insulators, and Charging by Induction
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what a conductor is
• Explain what an insulator is
• List the differences and similarities between conductors and insulators
• Describe the process of charging by induction
Intheprecedingsection,wesaidthatscientistswereabletocreateelectricchargeonlyonnonmetallicmaterialsandnever
onmetals.Tounderstandwhythisisthecase,youhavetounderstandmoreaboutthenatureandstructureofatoms.Inthis
section,wediscusshowandwhyelectricchargesdo—ordonot—movethroughmaterials(Figure5.9).Amorecomplete
description is given in a later chapter.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 189
Figure 5.9 This power adapter uses metal wires and connectors to conduct electricity from the
wall socket to a laptop computer. The conducting wires allow electrons to move freely through the
cables, which are shielded by rubber and plastic. These materials act as insulators that don’t allow
electric charge to escape outward. (credit: modification of work by “Evan-Amos”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Conductors and Insulators
As discussed in the previous section, electrons surround the tiny nucleus in the form of a (comparatively) vast cloud of
negativecharge.However,thisclouddoeshaveadefinitestructuretoit.Let’sconsideranatomofthemostcommonlyused
conductor, copper.
For reasons that will become clear in Atomic Structure (http://cnx.org/content/m58583/latest/) , there is an
outermost electron that is only loosely bound to the atom’s nucleus. It can be easily dislodged; it then moves to a
neighboring atom. In a large mass of copper atoms (such as a copper wire or a sheet of copper), these vast numbers
of outermost electrons (one per atom) wander from atom to atom, and are the electrons that do the moving when
electricityflows.Thesewandering,or“free,”electronsarecalledconductionelectrons,andcopperisthereforeanexcellent
conductor (of electric charge). All conducting elements have a similar arrangement of their electrons, with one or two
conduction electrons. This includes most metals.
Insulators,incontrast,aremadefrommaterialsthatlackconductionelectrons;chargeflowsonlywithgreatdifficulty,if
atall.Evenifexcesschargeisaddedtoaninsulatingmaterial,itcannotmove,remainingindefinitelyinplace.Thisiswhy
insulatingmaterialsexhibittheelectricalattractionandrepulsionforcesdescribedearlier,whereasconductorsdonot;any
excess chargeplaced onaconductor wouldinstantly flowaway (duetomutual repulsion fromexisting charges),leaving
noexcesschargearoundtocreateforces.Chargecannotflowalongorthroughaninsulator,soitselectricforcesremain
forlongperiodsoftime.(Chargewilldissipatefromaninsulator,givenenoughtime.)Asithappens,amber,fur,andmost
semi-precious gems are insulators, as are materials like wood, glass, and plastic.
Charging by Induction
Let’s examine in more detail what happens in a conductor when an electrically charged object is brought close to it. As
mentioned,theconductionelectronsintheconductorareabletomovewithnearlycompletefreedom.Asaresult,whena
chargedinsulator(suchasapositivelychargedglassrod)isbroughtclosetotheconductor,the(total)chargeontheinsulator
exerts an electric force on the conduction electrons. Since the rod is positively charged, the conduction electrons (which
themselves are negatively charged) are attracted, flowing toward the insulator to the near side of the conductor (Figure
5.10).
Now,theconductorisstilloverallelectricallyneutral;theconductionelectronshavechangedposition,buttheyarestillin
theconductingmaterial.However,theconductornowhasachargedistribution;thenearend(theportionoftheconductor
closesttotheinsulator)nowhasmorenegativechargethanpositivecharge,andthereverseistrueoftheendfarthestfrom
theinsulator.Therelocationofnegativechargestothenearsideoftheconductorresultsinanoverallpositivechargeinthe
partoftheconductorfarthestfromtheinsulator.Wehavethuscreatedanelectricchargedistributionwhereonedidnotexist
before.Thisprocessisreferredtoasinducingpolarization—inthiscase,polarizingtheconductor.Theresultingseparation
ofpositiveandnegativechargeiscalledpolarization,andamaterial,orevenamolecule,thatexhibitspolarizationissaidto
bepolarized.Asimilarsituationoccurswithanegativelychargedinsulator,buttheresultingpolarizationisintheopposite
direction.