# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 450-456
############################################################

442 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
The BCS theory is able to predict many of the properties observed in superconductors. Examples include the Meissner
effect,thecritical temperature, thecritical field,and,perhapsmostimportantly,theresistivity becomingzeroatacritical
temperature. We can think about this last phenomenon qualitatively as follows. In a normal conductor, resistivity results
from the interaction of the conduction electrons with the lattice. In this interaction, the energy exchanged is on the order
of k T, the thermal energy. In a superconductor, electric current is carried by the Cooper pairs. The only way for a
B
lattice toscatteraCooperpairistobreakitup.Thedestructionofonepairthendestroysthecollective motionofallthe
pairs. This destruction requires energy on the order of 10 −3 eV, which is the size of the energy gap. Below the critical
temperature,thereisnotenoughthermalenergyavailableforthisprocess,sotheCooperpairstravelunimpededthroughout
the superconductor.
Finally,itisinterestingtonotethatnoevidenceofsuperconductivityhasbeenfoundinthebestnormalconductors,suchas
copperandsilver.Thisisnotunexpected,giventheBCStheory.Thebasisfortheformationofthesuperconductingstate
isaninteractionbetweentheelectronsandthelattice.Inthebestconductors,theelectron-latticeinteractionisweakest,as
evidentfromtheirminimalresistivity.Wemightexpectthenthatinthesematerials,theinteractionissoweakthatCooper
pairs cannot be formed, and superconductivity is therefore precluded.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 443
CHAPTER 9 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
acceptor impurity atom substituted for another in a semiconductor that results in a free electron
amplifier electrical device that amplifies an electric signal
base current current drawn from the basen-type material in a transistor
BCS theory theory of superconductivity based on electron-lattice-electron interactions
body-centered cubic (BCC) crystalstructureinwhichanionissurroundedbyeightnearestneighborslocatedatthe
corners of a unit cell
breakdown voltage in a diode, the reverse bias voltage needed to cause an avalanche of current
collector current current drawn from the collectorp-type material
conduction band above the valence band, the next available band in the energy structure of a crystal
Cooper pair coupled electron pair in a superconductor
covalent bond bond formed by the sharing of one or more electrons between atoms
critical magnetic field maximum field required to produce superconductivity
critical temperature maximum temperature to produce superconductivity
density of states number of allowed quantum states per unit energy
depletion layer region near thep-njunction that produces an electric field
dissociation energy amountofenergyneededtobreakapartamoleculeintoatoms;also,totalenergyperionpairto
separate the crystal into isolated ions
donor impurity atom substituted for another in a semiconductor that results in a free electron hole
doping alteration of a semiconductor by the substitution of one type of atom with another
drift velocity average velocity of a randomly moving particle
electric dipole transition transition between energy levels brought by the absorption or emission of radiation
electron affinity energy associated with an accepted (bound) electron
electron number density number of electrons per unit volume
energy band nearly continuous band of electronic energy levels in a solid
energy gap gap between energy bands in a solid
equilibrium separation distance distance between atoms in a molecule
exchange symmetry how a total wave function changes under the exchange of two electrons
face-centered cubic (FCC) crystalstructureinwhichanionissurroundedbysixnearestneighborslocatedatthefaces
at the faces of a unit cell
Fermi energy largest energy filled by electrons in a metal at T =0K
Fermi factor number that expresses the probability that a state of given energy will be filled
Fermi temperature effective temperature of electrons with energies equal to the Fermi energy
forward bias configuration diode configuration that results in high current
free electron model model of a metal that views electrons as a gas
hole unoccupied states in an energy band
hybridization change in the energy structure of an atom in which energetically favorable mixed states participate in
bonding

444 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
impurity atom
acceptor or donor impurity atom
impurity band new energy band create by semiconductor doping
ionic bond bond formed by the Coulomb attraction of a positive and negative ions
junction transistor electrical valve based on ap-n-pjunction
lattice regular array or arrangement of atoms into a crystal structure
Madelung constant constantthatdependsonthegeometryofacrystalusedtodeterminethetotalpotentialenergyof
an ion in a crystal
majority carrier free electrons (or holes) contributed by impurity atoms
minority carrier free electrons (or holes) produced by thermal excitations across the energy gap
n-type semiconductor doped semiconductor that conducts electrons
p-njunction junction formed by joiningp- andn-type semiconductors
p-type semiconductor doped semiconductor that conducts holes
polyatomic molecule molecule formed of more than one atom
repulsion constant experimental parameterassociatedwitharepulsiveforcebetweenionsbroughtsoclosetogether
that the exclusion principle is important
reverse bias configuration diode configuration that results in low current
rotational energy level energy level associated with the rotational energy of a molecule
selection rule rule that limits the possible transitions from one quantum state to another
semiconductor solid with a relatively small energy gap between the lowest completely filled band and the next
available unfilled band
simple cubic basic crystal structure in which each ion is located at the nodes of a three-dimensional grid
type I superconductor superconducting element, such as aluminum or mercury
type II superconductor superconducting compound or alloy, such as a transition metal or an actinide series element
valence band highest energy band that is filled in the energy structure of a crystal
van der Waals bond bond formed by the attraction of two electrically polarized molecules
vibrational energy level energy level associated with the vibrational energy of a molecule
KEY EQUATIONS
Electrostatic energy for equilibrium separation distance between atoms ke2
U coul = − r
0
Energy change associated with ionic bonding U
form
=E
transfer
+U
coul
+U
ex
Critical magnetic field of a superconductor ⎡ 2⎤
⎛T ⎞
B
c
(T)=B
c
(0)⎢1−
⎝T ⎠
⎥
⎣ c ⎦
Rotational energy of a diatomic molecule ℏ2
E r=l(l+1)
2I
Characteristic rotational energy of a molecule ℏ2
E 0r=
2I
Potential energy associated with the exclusion principle A
U ex= rn
Dissociation energy of a solid U diss =α k r e2⎛ ⎝ 1− 1 n ⎞ ⎠
0
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 445
Moment of inertia of a diatomic molecule with reduced mass µ I = µr2
0
Electron energy in a metal
E=
π2ℏ2
⎛n2+n2+n2⎞
2mL2⎝ 1 2 3⎠
Electron density of states of a metal 3/2
g(E)=
πV⎛8m
e
⎞
E1/2
2 ⎝ h2 ⎠
Fermi energy
E =
h2 ⎛3N⎞ 2/3
F 8m
e
⎝πV⎠
Fermi temperature E
T = F
F k
B
Hall effect V =uBw
H
Current versus bias voltage acrossp-njunction
I =I
⎛
e
eVb/k
B
T
−1
⎞
net 0⎝ ⎠
Current gain I c= βI B
Selection rule for rotational energy transitions Δl= ±1
Selection rule for vibrational energy transitions Δn= ±1
SUMMARY
9.1Types of Molecular Bonds
• Molecules form by two main types of bonds: the ionic bond and the covalent bond. An ionic bond transfers an
electron from one atom to another, and a covalent bond shares the electrons.
• The energy change associated with ionic bonding depends on three main processes: the ionization of an electron
fromoneatom,theacceptanceoftheelectronbythesecondatom,andtheCoulombattractionoftheresultingions.
• Covalent bonds involve space-symmetric wave functions.
• Atoms use a linear combination of wave functions in bonding with other molecules (hybridization).
9.2Molecular Spectra
• Molecules possess vibrational and rotational energy.
• Energydifferencesbetweenadjacentvibrationalenergylevelsarelargerthanthosebetweenrotationalenergylevels.
• Separation between peaks in an absorption spectrum is inversely related to the moment of inertia.
• Transitions between vibrational and rotational energy levels follow selection rules.
9.3Bonding in Crystalline Solids
• Packing structures of common ionic salts include FCC and BCC.
• The density of a crystal is inversely related to the equilibrium constant.
• The dissociation energy of a salt is large when the equilibrium separation distance is small.
• The densities and equilibrium radii for common salts (FCC) are nearly the same.
9.4Free Electron Model of Metals
• Metalsconductelectricity,andelectricityiscomposedoflargenumbersofrandomlycollidingandapproximately
free electrons.

446 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
• Theallowedenergystatesofanelectronarequantized.Thisquantizationappearsintheformofverylargeelectron
energies, even at T =0K.
• Theallowedenergiesoffreeelectronsinametaldependonelectronmassandontheelectronnumberdensityofthe
metal.
• Thedensityofstatesofanelectroninametalincreaseswithenergy,becausetherearemorewaysforanelectronto
fill a high-energy state than a low-energy state.
• Pauli’sexclusionprinciplestatesthatonlytwoelectrons(spinupandspindown)canoccupythesameenergylevel.
Therefore, in filling these energy levels (lowest to highest at T =0K), the last and largest energy level to be
occupied is called the Fermi energy.
9.5Band Theory of Solids
• The energy levels of an electron in a crystal can be determined by solving Schrödinger’s equation for a periodic
potential and by studying changes to the electron energy structure as atoms are pushed together from a distance.
• The energy structure of a crystal is characterized by continuous energy bands and energy gaps.
• The ability of a solid to conduct electricity relies on the energy structure of the solid.
9.6Semiconductors and Doping
• The energy structure of a semiconductor can be altered by substituting one type of atom with another (doping).
• Semiconductorn-type doping creates and fills new energy levels just below the conduction band.
• Semiconductorp-type doping creates new energy levels just above the valence band.
• The Hall effect can be used to determine charge, drift velocity, and charge carrier number density of a
semiconductor.
9.7Semiconductor Devices
• A diode is produced by an n-p junction. A diode allows current to move in just one direction. In forward biased
configuration of a diode, the current increases exponentially with the voltage.
• A transistor is produced by ann-p-njunction. A transistor is an electric valve that controls the current in a circuit.
• A transistor is a critical component in audio amplifiers, computers, and many other devices.
9.8Superconductivity
• Asuperconductorischaracterized bytwofeatures:theconductionofelectronswithzeroelectrical resistanceand
the repelling of magnetic field lines.
• A minimum temperature is required for superconductivity to occur.
• A strong magnetic field destroys superconductivity.
• Superconductivity can be explain in terms of Cooper pairs.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
4. Whatpreventsapositiveandnegativeionfromhaving
9.1Types of Molecular Bonds a zero separation?
1. What is the main difference between an ionic bond, a
covalent bond, and avan der Waals bond? 5. Forthe H molecule,whymustthespinstheelectron
2
spins be antiparallel?
2. For the following cases, what type of bonding is
expected? (a) KCl molecule; (b) N molecule.
2
9.2Molecular Spectra
3. Describe three steps to ionic bonding. 6. Doestheabsorptionspectrumofthediatomicmolecule
HCl depend on the isotope of chlorine contained in the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 447
molecule? Explain your reasoning.
9.5Band Theory of Solids
7. Rank the energy spacing (ΔE) of the following 19. Whatarethetwomainapproachesusedtodetermine
transitions from least to greatest: an electron energy the energy levels of electrons in a crystal?
transitioninanatom(atomicenergy),therotationalenergy
of a molecule, or the vibrational energy of a molecule? 20. Describetwofeaturesofenergylevelsforanelectron
in a crystal.
8. Explain key features of a vibrational-rotation energy
spectrum of the diatomic molecule. 21. How does the number of energy levels in a band
correspond to the number,N, of atoms.
9.3Bonding in Crystalline Solids 22. Why are some materials very good conductors and
others very poor conductors?
9. Why is the equilibrium separation distance between
K + andCl− different for a diatomic molecule than for
23. Why are some materials semiconductors?
solid KCl?
24. Whydoestheresistanceofasemiconductordecrease
10. Describethedifferencebetweenaface-centeredcubic
as the temperature increases?
structure (FCC) and a body-centered cubic structure
(BCC).
9.6Semiconductors and Doping
11. Insodiumchloride,howmany Cl– atomsare“nearest
25. Whatkindofsemiconductorisproducedifgermanium
neighbors”of Na + ?Howmany Na + atomsare“nearest
is doped with (a) arsenic, and (b) gallium?
neighbors” of Cl− ?
26. What kind of semiconductor is produced if silicon is
12. Incesiumiodide,howmany Cl− atomsare“nearest doped with (a) phosphorus, and (b) indium?
neighbors”of Cs + ?Howmany Cs + atomsare“nearest
neighbors” of Cl− ? 27. What is the Hall effect and what is it used for?
28. Forann-typesemiconductor,howdoimpurityatoms
13. The NaCl crystal structure is FCC. The equilibrium
alter the energy structure of the solid?
spacing is r =0.282nm. If each ion occupies a cubic
0
volume of r3, estimate the distance between “nearest
29. For a p-type semiconductor, how do impurity atoms
0
neighbor” Na + ions (center-to-center)? alter the energy structure of the solid?
9.7Semiconductor Devices
9.4Free Electron Model of Metals
30. When p- and n-type materials are joined, why is a
14. Why does the Fermi energy (E ) increase with the
F uniform electric field generated near the junction?
number of electrons in a metal?
31. Whenp-andn-typematerialsarejoined,whydoesthe
15. If the electron number density (N/V) of a metal depletion layer not grow indefinitely?
increases by a factor 8, what happens to the Fermi energy
(E F )? 32. Howdoyouknowifadiodeisintheforwardbiased
configuration?
16. Why does the horizontal line in the graph in Figure
9.12suddenly stop at the Fermi energy? 33. Whydoesthereversebiasconfigurationleadtoavery
small current?
17. Why does the graph in Figure 9.12 increase
gradually from the origin? 34. What happens in the extreme case that where the n-
andp-type materials are heavily doped?
18. Why are the sharp transitions at the Fermi energy
“smoothed out” by increasing the temperature? 35. Explain how an audio amplifier works, using the
transistor concept.