# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 574-580
############################################################

562 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
Significance
Suppose that the mechanical system considered in this example is attached to a ceiling inside an elevator going up.
As long as the elevator moves up at a constant speed, the result stays the same because the weight does not
change. If the elevator moves up with acceleration, the critical mass is smaller because the weight of
becomes larger by an apparent weight due to the acceleration of the elevator. Still, in all cases the shorter string
breaks first.
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and analyze static equilibrium situations
• Set up a free-body diagram for an extended object in static equilibrium
• Set up and solve static equilibrium conditions for objects in equilibrium in various physical situations
All examples in this chapter are planar problems. Accordingly, we use equilibrium conditions in the component form
of Equation 12.7 to Equation 12.9. We introduced a problem-solving strategy in Example 12.1 to illustrate the
physical meaning of the equilibrium conditions. Now we generalize this strategy in a list of steps to follow when
solving static equilibrium problems for extended rigid bodies. We proceed in five practical steps.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Static Equilibrium
1. Identify the object to be analyzed. For some systems in equilibrium, it may be necessary to consider more
than one object. Identify all forces acting on the object. Identify the questions you need to answer. Identify
the information given in the problem. In realistic problems, some key information may be implicit in the
situation rather than provided explicitly.
2. Set up a free-body diagram for the object. (a) Choose the xy-reference frame for the problem. Draw a free-
body diagram for the object, including only the forces that act on it. When suitable, represent the forces in
terms of their components in the chosen reference frame. As you do this for each force, cross out the original
force so that you do not erroneously include the same force twice in equations. Label all forces—you will need
this for correct computations of net forces in the x- and y-directions. For an unknown force, the direction must
be assigned arbitrarily; think of it as a ‘working direction’ or ‘suspected direction.’ The correct direction is
determined by the sign that you obtain in the final solution. A plus sign means that the working direction is
the actual direction. A minus sign means that the actual direction is opposite to the assumed working
direction. (b) Choose the location of the rotation axis; in other words, choose the pivot point with respect to
which you will compute torques of acting forces. On the free-body diagram, indicate the location of the pivot
and the lever arms of acting forces—you will need this for correct computations of torques. In the selection of
the pivot, keep in mind that the pivot can be placed anywhere you wish, but the guiding principle is that the
best choice will simplify as much as possible the calculation of the net torque along the rotation axis.
3. Set up the equations of equilibrium for the object. (a) Use the free-body diagram to write a correct equilibrium
condition Equation 12.7 for force components in the x-direction. (b) Use the free-body diagram to write a
correct equilibrium condition Equation 12.11 for force components in the y-direction. (c) Use the free-body
diagram to write a correct equilibrium condition Equation 12.9 for torques along the axis of rotation. Use
Equation 12.10 to evaluate torque magnitudes and senses.
4. Simplify and solve the system of equations for equilibrium to obtain unknown quantities. At this point, your
work involves algebra only. Keep in mind that the number of equations must be the same as the number of
unknowns. If the number of unknowns is larger than the number of equations, the problem cannot be solved.
5. Evaluate the expressions for the unknown quantities that you obtained in your solution. Your final answers
Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 563
should have correct numerical values and correct physical units. If they do not, then use the previous steps to
track back a mistake to its origin and correct it. Also, you may independently check for your numerical answers
by shifting the pivot to a different location and solving the problem again, which is what we did in Example
12.1.
Note that setting up a free-body diagram for a rigid-body equilibrium problem is the most important component in
the solution process. Without the correct setup and a correct diagram, you will not be able to write down correct
conditions for equilibrium. Also note that a free-body diagram for an extended rigid body that may undergo
rotational motion is different from a free-body diagram for a body that experiences only translational motion (as you
saw in the chapters on Newton’s laws of motion). In translational dynamics, a body is represented as its CM, where
all forces on the body are attached and no torques appear. This does not hold true in rotational dynamics, where an
extended rigid body cannot be represented by one point alone. The reason for this is that in analyzing rotation, we
must identify torques acting on the body, and torque depends both on the acting force and on its lever arm. Here,
the free-body diagram for an extended rigid body helps us identify external torques.
EXAMPLE 12.3
The Torque Balance
Three masses are attached to a uniform meter stick, as shown in Figure 12.9. The mass of the meter stick is 150.0 g
and the masses to the left of the fulcrum are and Find the mass that balances the
system when it is attached at the right end of the stick, and the normal reaction force at the fulcrum when the
system is balanced.
FIGURE 12.9 In a torque balance, a horizontal beam is supported at a fulcrum (indicated by S) and masses are attached to both sides of the
fulcrum. The system is in static equilibrium when the beam does not rotate. It is balanced when the beam remains level.
Strategy
For the arrangement shown in the figure, we identify the following five forces acting on the meter stick:
is the weight of mass is the weight of mass
is the weight of the entire meter stick; is the weight of unknown mass
is the normal reaction force at the support point S.
We choose a frame of reference where the direction of the y-axis is the direction of gravity, the direction of the x-axis
is along the meter stick, and the axis of rotation (the z-axis) is perpendicular to the x-axis and passes through the
support point S. In other words, we choose the pivot at the point where the meter stick touches the support. This is
a natural choice for the pivot because this point does not move as the stick rotates. Now we are ready to set up the
free-body diagram for the meter stick. We indicate the pivot and attach five vectors representing the five forces
along the line representing the meter stick, locating the forces with respect to the pivot Figure 12.10. At this stage,
we can identify the lever arms of the five forces given the information provided in the problem. For the three hanging
masses, the problem is explicit about their locations along the stick, but the information about the location of the
weight w is given implicitly. The key word here is “uniform.” We know from our previous studies that the CM of a
uniform stick is located at its midpoint, so this is where we attach the weight w, at the 50-cm mark.

564 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.10 Free-body diagram for the meter stick. The pivot is chosen at the support point S.
Solution
With Figure 12.9 and Figure 12.10 for reference, we begin by finding the lever arms of the five forces acting on the
stick:
Now we can find the five torques with respect to the chosen pivot:
The second equilibrium condition (equation for the torques) for the meter stick is
When substituting torque values into this equation, we can omit the torques giving zero contributions. In this way
the second equilibrium condition is
12.17
Selecting the -direction to be parallel to the first equilibrium condition for the stick is
Substituting the forces, the first equilibrium condition becomes
12.18
We solve these equations simultaneously for the unknown values and In Equation 12.17, we cancel the g
factor and rearrange the terms to obtain
To obtain we divide both sides by so we have
Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 565
12.19
To find the normal reaction force, we rearrange the terms in Equation 12.18, converting grams to kilograms:
12.20
Significance
Notice that Equation 12.17 is independent of the value of g. The torque balance may therefore be used to measure
mass, since variations in g-values on Earth’s surface do not affect these measurements. This is not the case for a
spring balance because it measures the force.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.3
Repeat Example 12.3 using the left end of the meter stick to calculate the torques; that is, by placing the pivot at the
left end of the meter stick.
In the next example, we show how to use the first equilibrium condition (equation for forces) in the vector form
given by Equation 12.7 and Equation 12.8. We present this solution to illustrate the importance of a suitable choice
of reference frame. Although all inertial reference frames are equivalent and numerical solutions obtained in one
frame are the same as in any other, an unsuitable choice of reference frame can make the solution quite lengthy and
convoluted, whereas a wise choice of reference frame makes the solution straightforward. We show this in the
equivalent solution to the same problem. This particular example illustrates an application of static equilibrium to
biomechanics.
EXAMPLE 12.4
Forces in the Forearm
A weightlifter is holding a 50.0-lb weight (equivalent to 222.4 N) with his forearm, as shown in Figure 12.11. His
forearm is positioned at with respect to his upper arm. The forearm is supported by a contraction of the
biceps muscle, which causes a torque around the elbow. Assuming that the tension in the biceps acts along the
vertical direction given by gravity, what tension must the muscle exert to hold the forearm at the position shown?
What is the force on the elbow joint? Assume that the forearm’s weight is negligible. Give your final answers in SI
units.

566 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.11 The forearm is rotated around the elbow (E) by a contraction of the biceps muscle, which causes tension
Strategy
We identify three forces acting on the forearm: the unknown force at the elbow; the unknown tension in the
muscle; and the weight with magnitude We adopt the frame of reference with the x-axis along the
forearm and the pivot at the elbow. The vertical direction is the direction of the weight, which is the same as the
direction of the upper arm. The x-axis makes an angle with the vertical. The y-axis is perpendicular to the
x-axis. Now we set up the free-body diagram for the forearm. First, we draw the axes, the pivot, and the three
vectors representing the three identified forces. Then we locate the angle and represent each force by its x- and
y-components, remembering to cross out the original force vector to avoid double counting. Finally, we label the
forces and their lever arms. The free-body diagram for the forearm is shown in Figure 12.12. At this point, we are
ready to set up equilibrium conditions for the forearm. Each force has x- and y-components; therefore, we have two
equations for the first equilibrium condition, one equation for each component of the net force acting on the
forearm.
FIGURE 12.12 Free-body diagram for the forearm: The pivot is located at point E (elbow).
Notice that in our frame of reference, contributions to the second equilibrium condition (for torques) come only from
the y-components of the forces because the x-components of the forces are all parallel to their lever arms, so that
for any of them we have in Equation 12.10. For the y-components we have in Equation 12.10.
Also notice that the torque of the force at the elbow is zero because this force is attached at the pivot. So the
contribution to the net torque comes only from the torques of and of
Solution
We see from the free-body diagram that the x-component of the net force satisfies the equation
Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 567
12.21
and the y-component of the net force satisfies
12.22
Equation 12.21 and Equation 12.22 are two equations of the first equilibrium condition (for forces). Next, we read
from the free-body diagram that the net torque along the axis of rotation is
12.23
Equation 12.23 is the second equilibrium condition (for torques) for the forearm. The free-body diagram shows that
the lever arms are and At this point, we do not need to convert inches into SI units,
because as long as these units are consistent in Equation 12.23, they cancel out. Using the free-body diagram again,
we find the magnitudes of the component forces:
We substitute these magnitudes into Equation 12.21, Equation 12.22, and Equation 12.23 to obtain, respectively,
When we simplify these equations, we see that we are left with only two independent equations for the two
unknown force magnitudes, F and T, because Equation 12.21 for the x-component is equivalent to Equation 12.22
for the y-component. In this way, we obtain the first equilibrium condition for forces
12.24
and the second equilibrium condition for torques
12.25
The magnitude of tension in the muscle is obtained by solving Equation 12.25:
The force at the elbow is obtained by solving Equation 12.24:
The negative sign in the equation tells us that the actual force at the elbow is antiparallel to the working direction
adopted for drawing the free-body diagram. In the final answer, we convert the forces into SI units of force. The
answer is
Significance
Two important issues here are worth noting. The first concerns conversion into SI units, which can be done at the
very end of the solution as long as we keep consistency in units. The second important issue concerns the hinge