# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 26-31
############################################################

16 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
which varies slightly with temperature. (The derivation of this equation is analogous to that of the more important
equation for three dimensions, below.)
Figure 1.7 In general, objects expand in all directions as temperature increases. In these drawings, the original
boundaries of the objects are shown with solid lines, and the expanded boundaries with dashed lines. (a) Area increases
because both length and width increase. The area of a circular plug also increases. (b) If the plug is removed, the hole it
leaves becomes larger with increasing temperature, just as if the expanding plug were still in place. (c) Volume also
increases, because all three dimensions increase.
Thermal Expansion in Three Dimensions
dV dV
The relationship between volume and temperature is given by = βVΔT, where β is the coefficient of
dT dT
volume expansion. As you can show inExercise 1.60, β=3α. This equation is usually written as
ΔV = βVΔT. (1.4)
Note that the values of β inTable 1.2are equal to 3α except for rounding.
Volumeexpansionisdefinedforliquids,butlinearandareaexpansionarenot,asaliquid’schangesinlineardimensions
and area depend on the shape of its container. Thus,Table 1.2shows liquids’ values of β but not α.
In general, objects expand with increasing temperature. Water is the most important exception to this rule. Water does
expandwithincreasingtemperature(itsdensitydecreases)attemperaturesgreaterthan 4°C(40°F).However,itisdensest
at +4°C andexpandswithdecreasingtemperaturebetween +4°C and 0°C (40°Fto32°F),asshowninFigure1.8.
Astrikingeffectofthisphenomenonisthefreezingofwaterinapond.Whenwaternearthesurfacecoolsdownto 4°C,
itisdenserthantheremainingwaterandthussinkstothebottom.This“turnover”leavesalayerofwarmerwaternearthe
surface,whichisthencooled.However,ifthetemperatureinthesurfacelayerdropsbelow 4°C,thatwaterislessdense
thanthewaterbelow,andthusstaysnearthetop.Asaresult,thepondsurfacecanfreezeover.Thelayeroficeinsulatesthe
liquidwaterbelowitfromlowairtemperatures.Fishandotheraquaticlifecansurvivein 4°C waterbeneathice,dueto
this unusual characteristic of water.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 17
Figure 1.8 This curve shows thedensity of wateras a function of temperature. Note that the
thermal expansion at low temperatures is very small. The maximum density at 4°C is only
0.0075% greater than the density at 2°C, and 0.012% greater than that at 0°C. The
decrease of density below 4°C occurs because the liquid water approachs the solid crystal
form of ice, which contains more empty space than the liquid.
Example 1.3
Calculating Thermal Expansion
Supposeyour60.0-L (15.9-gal-gal)steelgasolinetankisfullofgasthatiscoolbecauseithasjustbeenpumped
fromanundergroundreservoir.Now,boththetankandthegasolinehaveatemperatureof 15.0°C. Howmuch
gasoline has spilled by the time they warm to 35.0°C?
Strategy
Thetankandgasolineincreaseinvolume,butthegasolineincreasesmore,sotheamountspilledisthedifference
intheirvolumechanges.Wecanusetheequationforvolumeexpansiontocalculatethechangeinvolumeofthe
gasoline and of the tank. (The gasoline tank can be treated as solid steel.)
Solution
1. Use the equation for volume expansion to calculate the increase in volume of the steel tank:
ΔV s= β s V sΔT.
2. The increase in volume of the gasoline is given by this equation:
ΔV gas= β gas V gasΔT.
3. Find the difference in volume to determine the amount spilled as
V
spill
=ΔV gas−ΔV s.
Alternatively,we can combine these three equations into a single equation. (Note that the original volumes are
equal.)
V
spill
=⎛
⎝
β gas−β
s
⎞
⎠
VΔT
⎡ −6 ⎤
= (950−35)×10 /°C(60.0L)(20.0°C)
⎣ ⎦
=1.10L.
Significance
Thisamountissignificant,particularlyfora60.0-Ltank.Theeffectissostrikingbecausethegasolineandsteel

18 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
expand quickly. The rate of change in thermal properties is discussed later in this chapter.
Ifyoutrytocapthetanktightlytopreventoverflow,youwillfindthatitleaksanyway,eitheraroundthecapor
byburstingthetank.Tightlyconstrictingtheexpandinggasisequivalenttocompressingit,andbothliquidsand
solidsresistcompressionwithextremelylargeforces.Toavoidrupturingrigidcontainers,thesecontainershave
air gaps, which allow them to expand and contract without stressing them.
1.1 Check Your Understanding Does a given reading ona gasoline gauge indicate more gasoline in cold
weather or in hot weather, or does the temperature not matter?
Thermal Stress
If you change the temperature of an object while preventing it from expanding or contracting, the object is subjected to
stressthatiscompressiveiftheobjectwouldexpandintheabsenceofconstraintandtensileifitwouldcontract.Thisstress
resulting from temperature changes is known asthermal stress. It can be quite large and can cause damage.
Toavoidthisstress,engineersmaydesigncomponentssotheycanexpandandcontractfreely.Forinstance,inhighways,
gapsaredeliberatelyleftbetweenblockstopreventthermalstressfromdeveloping.Whennogapscanbeleft,engineers
must consider thermal stress in their designs. Thus, the reinforcing rods in concrete are made of steel because steel’s
coefficient of linear expansion is nearly equal to that of concrete.
Tocalculatethethermalstressinarodwhoseendsarebothfixedrigidly,wecanthinkofthestressasdevelopingintwo
steps. First, let the ends be free to expand (or contract) and find the expansion (or contraction). Second, find the stress
necessarytocompress(orextend)therodtoitsoriginallengthbythemethodsyoustudiedinStatic Equilibrium and
Elasticity(http://cnx.org/content/m58339/latest/)onstaticequilibriumandelasticity.Inotherwords,the ΔL ofthe
thermal expansion equals the ΔL of the elastic distortion (except that the signs are opposite).
Example 1.4
Calculating Thermal Stress
Concrete blocks are laid out next to each other on a highway without any space between them, so they cannot
expand.Theconstructioncrewdidtheworkonawinterdaywhenthetemperaturewas 5°C.Findthestressin
theblocksonahotsummerdaywhenthetemperatureis 38°C.ThecompressiveYoung’smodulusofconcrete
is Y =20×10 9 N/m2.
Strategy
According to the chapter on static equilibrium and elasticity, the stressF/Ais given by
F =YΔL
,
A L
0
whereYistheYoung’smodulusofthematerial—concrete, inthiscase.Inthermalexpansion, ΔL=αL ΔT.
0
We combine these two equations by noting that the two ΔL’s are equal, as stated above. Because we are not
given L orA, we can obtain a numerical answer only if they both cancel out.
0
Solution
We substitute the thermal-expansion equation into the elasticity equation to get
F =Y αL 0 ΔT =YαΔT,
A L
0
and as we hoped, L has canceled andAappears only inF/A, the notation for the quantity we are calculating.
0
Now we need only insert the numbers:
F = ⎛ 20×10 9 N/m2⎞⎛ 12×10 −6 /°C ⎞ (38°C−5°C)=7.9×10 6 N/m2.
A ⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 19
Significance
Theultimatecompressivestrengthofconcreteis 20×10 6 N/m2, sotheblocksareunlikelytobreak.However,
the ultimate shear strength of concrete is only 2×10 6 N/m2, so some might chip off.
1.2 Check Your Understanding Two objects A and B have the same dimensions and are constrained
identically.AismadeofamaterialwithahigherthermalexpansioncoefficientthanB.Iftheobjectsareheated
identically, willAfeel a greater stress thanB?
1.4 | Heat Transfer, Specific Heat, and Calorimetry
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain phenomena involving heat as a form of energy transfer
• Solve problems involving heat transfer
We have seen in previous chapters that energy is one of the fundamental concepts of physics. Heat is a type of energy
transfer that is caused by a temperature difference, and it can change the temperature of an object. As we learned earlier
in this chapter, heat transfer is the movement of energy from one place or material to another as a result of a difference
in temperature. Heat transfer is fundamental to such everyday activities as home heating and cooking, as well as many
industrial processes. It also forms a basis for the topics in the remainder of this chapter.
We also introduce the concept of internal energy, which can be increased or decreased by heat transfer. We discuss
anotherwaytochangetheinternalenergyofasystem,namelydoingworkonit.Thus,wearebeginningthestudyofthe
relationshipofheatandwork,whichisthebasisofenginesandrefrigeratorsandthecentraltopic(andoriginofthename)
of thermodynamics.
Internal Energy and Heat
A thermal system has internal energy (also called thermal energy), which is the sum of the mechanical energies of its
molecules.Asystem’sinternalenergyisproportionaltoitstemperature.Aswesawearlierinthischapter,iftwoobjectsat
differenttemperaturesarebroughtintocontactwitheachother,energyistransferredfromthehottertothecolderobjectuntil
thebodiesreachthermalequilibrium(thatis,theyareatthesametemperature).Noworkisdonebyeitherobjectbecause
no force acts through a distance (as we discussed in Work and Kinetic Energy (http://cnx.org/content/m58307/
latest/)).Theseobservationsrevealthatheatisenergytransferredspontaneouslyduetoatemperaturedifference.Figure
1.9shows an example of heat transfer.
Figure 1.9 (a) Here, the soft drink has a higher temperature than the ice, so they are not in thermal equilibrium. (b) When the
soft drink and ice are allowed to interact, heat is transferred from the drink to the ice due to the difference in temperatures until
they reach the same temperature, T′, achieving equilibrium. In fact, since the soft drink and ice are both in contact with the
surrounding air and the bench, the ultimate equilibrium temperature will be the same as that of the surroundings.

20 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
The meaning of“heat” in physics is different from its ordinary meaning. Forexample, in conversation, we may say “the
heatwasunbearable,”butinphysics,wewouldsaythatthetemperaturewashigh.Heatisaformofenergyflow,whereas
temperature is not. Incidentally, humans are sensitive toheat flowrather than to temperature.
Sinceheatisaformofenergy,itsSIunitisthejoule(J).Anothercommonunitofenergyoftenusedforheatisthecalorie
(cal), defined as the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 g of water by 1.00°C —specifically, between
14.5°C and 15.5°C,sincethereisaslighttemperaturedependence.Alsocommonlyusedisthekilocalorie(kcal),which
is the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of water by 1.00°C. Since mass is most often specified in
kilograms,thekilocalorieisconvenient.Confusingly,foodcalories(sometimescalled“bigcalories,”abbreviatedCal)are
actually kilocalories, a fact not easily determined from package labeling.
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat
It is also possible to change the temperature of a substance by doing work, which transfers energy into or out of a
system.Thisrealizationhelpedestablishthatheatisaformofenergy.JamesPrescottJoule(1818–1889)performedmany
experimentstoestablishthemechanicalequivalentofheat—theworkneededtoproducethesameeffectsasheattransfer.
In the units used for these two quantities, the value for this equivalence is
1.000kcal=4186J.
Weconsiderthisequationtorepresenttheconversionbetweentwounitsofenergy.(Othernumbersthatyoumayseerefer
to calories defined for temperature ranges other than 14.5°C to 15.5°C.)
Figure1.10showsoneofJoule’smostfamousexperimentalsetupsfordemonstratingthatworkandheatcanproducethe
sameeffectsandmeasuringthemechanicalequivalentofheat.Ithelpedestablishtheprincipleofconservationofenergy.
Gravitationalpotentialenergy(U)wasconvertedintokineticenergy(K),andthenrandomizedbyviscosityandturbulence
into increased average kinetic energy of atoms and molecules in the system, producing a temperature increase. Joule’s
contributions to thermodynamics were so significant that the SI unit of energy was named after him.
Figure 1.10 Joule’s experiment established the equivalence of heat and
work. As the masses descended, they caused the paddles to do work,
W =mgh, on the water. The result was a temperature increase, ΔT,
measured by the thermometer. Joule found that ΔT was proportional toW
and thus determined the mechanical equivalent of heat.
Increasing internal energy by heat transfer gives the same result as increasing it by doing work. Therefore, although a
system has a well-defined internal energy, we cannot say that it has a certain “heat content” or “work content.” A well-
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9