# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 760-766
############################################################

748 15 • Chapter Review
marked as , where is the new releases it from rest. The mass oscillates in
equilibrium position if a 0.25-kg-mass object is SHM. (a) Determine the equations of motion. (b)
hung from the spring? (c) If the spring has a Find the position, velocity, and acceleration of
force constant of 10.0 N/m and a 0.25-kg-mass the mass at time
object is set in motion as described, find the
61 . Find the ratio of the new/old periods of a
amplitude of the oscillations. (d) Find the
pendulum if the pendulum were transported
maximum velocity.
from Earth to the Moon, where the acceleration
57 . A diver on a diving board is undergoing SHM. Her due to gravity is .
mass is 55.0 kg and the period of her motion is
62 . At what rate will a pendulum clock run on the
0.800 s. The next diver's period of simple
Moon, where the acceleration due to gravity is
harmonic oscillation is 1.05 s. What is the
, if it keeps time accurately on Earth?
second diver's mass if the mass of the board is
That is, find the time (in hours) it takes the
negligible?
clock’s hour hand to make one revolution on the
58 . Suppose a diving board with no one on it Moon.
bounces up and down in a SHM with a frequency
63 . If a pendulum-driven clock gains 5.00 s/day,
of 4.00 Hz. The board has an effective mass of
what fractional change in pendulum length must
10.0 kg. What is the frequency of the SHM of a
be made for it to keep perfect time?
75.0-kg diver on the board?
64 . A 2.00-kg object hangs, at rest, on a 1.00-m-
59 . The device pictured in the following figure
long string attached to the ceiling. A 100-g mass
entertains infants while keeping them from
is fired with a speed of 20 m/s at the 2.00-kg
wandering. The child bounces in a harness
mass, and the 100.00-g mass collides perfectly
suspended from a door frame by a spring. (a) If
elastically with the 2.00-kg mass. Write an
the spring stretches 0.250 m while supporting
equation for the motion of the hanging mass
an 8.0-kg child, what is its force constant? (b)
after the collision. Assume air resistance is
What is the time for one complete bounce of this
negligible.
child? (c) What is the child’s maximum velocity if
the amplitude of her bounce is 0.200 m? 65 . A 2.00-kg object hangs, at rest, on a 1.00-m-
long string attached to the ceiling. A 100-g
object is fired with a speed of 20 m/s at the
2.00-kg object, and the two objects collide and
stick together in a totally inelastic collision.
Write an equation for the motion of the system
after the collision. Assume air resistance is
negligible.
66 . Assume that a pendulum used to drive a
grandfather clock has a length and
a mass M at temperature It can
be modeled as a physical pendulum as a rod
oscillating around one end. By what percentage
will the period change if the temperature
increases by Assume the length of the
rod changes linearly with temperature, where
and the rod is made of brass
FIGURE 15.34 (credit: Lisa Doehnert)
60 . A mass is placed on a frictionless, horizontal
67 . A 2.00-kg block lies at rest on a frictionless
table. A spring , which can be
table. A spring, with a spring constant of 100
stretched or compressed, is placed on the table.
N/m is attached to the wall and to the block. A
A 5.00-kg mass is attached to one end of the
second block of 0.50 kg is placed on top of the
spring, the other end is anchored to the wall.
first block. The 2.00-kg block is gently pulled to
The equilibrium position is marked at zero. A
a position and released from rest. There
student moves the mass out to and
Access for free at openstax.org

15 • Chapter Review 749
is a coefficient of friction of 0.45 between the motion that will allow the blocks to oscillate
two blocks. (a) What is the period of the without the 0.50-kg block sliding off?
oscillations? (b) What is the largest amplitude of
Challenge Problems
68 . A suspension bridge oscillates with an effective
that is a solution, where N is
force constant of . (a) How
known as the Brunt-Väisälä frequency. Note that
much energy is needed to make it oscillate with
in a stable atmosphere, the density decreases
an amplitude of 0.100 m? (b) If soldiers march
with height and parcel oscillates up and down.
across the bridge with a cadence equal to the
bridge’s natural frequency and impart 71 . Consider the van der Waals potential
of energy each second, how long
, used to model
does it take for the bridge’s oscillations to go
from 0.100 m to 0.500 m amplitude. the potential energy function of two molecules, where
the minimum potential is at . Find the force as
69 . Near the top of the Citigroup Center building in
a function of r. Consider a small displacement
New York City, there is an object with mass of
and use the binomial theorem:
on springs that have adjustable
,
force constants. Its function is to dampen wind-
to show that the force does approximate a Hooke’s
driven oscillations of the building by oscillating
law force.
at the same frequency as the building is being
driven—the driving force is transferred to the 72 . Suppose the length of a clock’s pendulum is
object, which oscillates instead of the entire changed by 1.000%, exactly at noon one day.
building. (a) What effective force constant What time will the clock read 24.00 hours later,
should the springs have to make the object assuming it the pendulum has kept perfect time
oscillate with a period of 2.00 s? (b) What energy before the change? Note that there are two
is stored in the springs for a 2.00-m answers, and perform the calculation to four-
displacement from equilibrium? digit precision.
70 . Parcels of air (small volumes of air) in a stable 73 . (a) The springs of a pickup truck act like a single
atmosphere (where the temperature increases
spring with a force constant of .
with height) can oscillate up and down, due to
By how much will the truck be depressed by its
the restoring force provided by the buoyancy of
maximum load of 1000 kg? (b) If the pickup
the air parcel. The frequency of the oscillations
truck has four identical springs, what is the force
are a measure of the stability of the atmosphere.
constant of each?
Assuming that the acceleration of an air parcel
can be modeled as , prove

750 15 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 16
Waves
FIGURE 16.1 From the world of renewable energy sources comes the electric power-generating buoy. Although there are many versions,
this one converts the up-and-down motion, as well as side-to-side motion, of the buoy into rotational motion in order to turn an electric
generator, which stores the energy in batteries.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1 Traveling Waves
16.2 Mathematics of Waves
16.3 Wave Speed on a Stretched String
16.4 Energy and Power of a Wave
16.5 Interference of Waves
16.6 Standing Waves and Resonance
INTRODUCTION In this chapter, we study the physics of wave motion. We concentrate on mechanical waves, which
are disturbances that move through a medium such as air or water. Like simple harmonic motion studied in the
preceding chapter, the energy transferred through the medium is proportional to the amplitude squared. Surface
water waves in the ocean are transverse waves in which the energy of the wave travels horizontally while the water
oscillates up and down due to some restoring force. In the picture above, a buoy is used to convert the awesome
power of ocean waves into electricity. The up-and-down motion of the buoy generated as the waves pass is
converted into rotational motion that turns a rotor in an electric generator. The generator charges batteries, which
are in turn used to provide a consistent energy source for the end user. This model was successfully tested by the US
Navy in a project to provide power to coastal security networks and was able to provide an average power of 350 W.
The buoy survived the difficult ocean environment, including operation off the New Jersey coast through Hurricane
Irene in 2011.
The concepts presented in this chapter will be the foundation for many interesting topics, from the transmission of
information to the concepts of quantum mechanics.

752 16 • Waves
16.1 Traveling Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the basic characteristics of wave motion
• Define the terms wavelength, amplitude, period, frequency, and wave speed
• Explain the difference between longitudinal and transverse waves, and give examples of each type
• List the different types of waves
We saw in Oscillations that oscillatory motion is an important type of behavior that can be used to model a wide
range of physical phenomena. Oscillatory motion is also important because oscillations can generate waves, which
are of fundamental importance in physics. Many of the terms and equations we studied in the chapter on oscillations
apply equally well to wave motion (Figure 16.2).
FIGURE 16.2 An ocean wave is probably the first picture that comes to mind when you hear the word “wave.” Although this breaking wave,
and ocean waves in general, have apparent similarities to the basic wave characteristics we will discuss, the mechanisms driving ocean
waves are highly complex and beyond the scope of this chapter. It may seem natural, and even advantageous, to apply the concepts in this
chapter to ocean waves, but ocean waves are nonlinear, and the simple models presented in this chapter do not fully explain them. (credit:
Steve Jurvetson)
Types of Waves
A wave is a disturbance that propagates, or moves from the place it was created. There are three basic types of
waves: mechanical waves, electromagnetic waves, and matter waves.
Basic mechanical waves are governed by Newton’s laws and require a medium. A medium is the substance
mechanical waves propagate through, and the medium produces an elastic restoring force when it is deformed.
Mechanical waves transfer energy and momentum, without transferring mass. Some examples of mechanical waves
are water waves, sound waves, and seismic waves. The medium for water waves is water; for sound waves, the
medium is usually air. (Sound waves can travel in other media as well; we will look at that in more detail in Sound.)
For surface water waves, the disturbance occurs on the surface of the water, perhaps created by a rock thrown into
a pond or by a swimmer splashing the surface repeatedly. For sound waves, the disturbance is a change in air
pressure, perhaps created by the oscillating cone inside a speaker or a vibrating tuning fork. In both cases, the
disturbance is the oscillation of the molecules of the fluid. In mechanical waves, energy and momentum transfer
with the motion of the wave, whereas the mass oscillates around an equilibrium point. (We discuss this in Energy
and Power of a Wave.) Earthquakes generate seismic waves from several types of disturbances, including the
disturbance of Earth’s surface and pressure disturbances under the surface. Seismic waves travel through the solids
and liquids that form Earth. In this chapter, we focus on mechanical waves.
Access for free at openstax.org

16.1 • Traveling Waves 753
Electromagnetic waves are associated with oscillations in electric and magnetic fields and do not require a medium.
Examples include gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet waves, visible light, infrared waves, microwaves, and radio waves.
Electromagnetic waves can travel through a vacuum at the speed of light, For
example, light from distant stars travels through the vacuum of space and reaches Earth. Electromagnetic waves
have some characteristics that are similar to mechanical waves; they are covered in more detail in Electromagnetic
Waves (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-2/pages/16-introduction).
Matter waves are a central part of the branch of physics known as quantum mechanics. These waves are associated
with protons, electrons, neutrons, and other fundamental particles found in nature. The theory that all types of
matter have wave-like properties was first proposed by Louis de Broglie in 1924. Matter waves are discussed in
Photons and Matter Waves (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/6-introduction).
Mechanical Waves
Mechanical waves exhibit characteristics common to all waves, such as amplitude, wavelength, period, frequency,
and energy. All wave characteristics can be described by a small set of underlying principles.
The simplest mechanical waves repeat themselves for several cycles and are associated with simple harmonic
motion. These simple harmonic waves can be modeled using some combination of sine and cosine functions. For
example, consider the simplified surface water wave that moves across the surface of water as illustrated in Figure
16.3. Unlike complex ocean waves, in surface water waves, the medium, in this case water, moves vertically,
oscillating up and down, whereas the disturbance of the wave moves horizontally through the medium. In Figure
16.3, the waves causes a seagull to move up and down in simple harmonic motion as the wave crests and troughs
(peaks and valleys) pass under the bird. The crest is the highest point of the wave, and the trough is the lowest part
of the wave. The time for one complete oscillation of the up-and-down motion is the wave’s period T. The wave’s
frequency is the number of waves that pass through a point per unit time and is equal to The period can be
expressed using any convenient unit of time but is usually measured in seconds; frequency is usually measured in
hertz (Hz), where
The length of the wave is called the wavelength and is represented by the Greek letter lambda , which is
measured in any convenient unit of length, such as a centimeter or meter. The wavelength can be measured
between any two similar points along the medium that have the same height and the same slope. In Figure 16.3, the
wavelength is shown measured between two crests. As stated above, the period of the wave is equal to the time for
one oscillation, but it is also equal to the time for one wavelength to pass through a point along the wave’s path.
The amplitude of the wave (A) is a measure of the maximum displacement of the medium from its equilibrium
position. In the figure, the equilibrium position is indicated by the dotted line, which is the height of the water if
there were no waves moving through it. In this case, the wave is symmetrical, the crest of the wave is a distance
above the equilibrium position, and the trough is a distance below the equilibrium position. The units for the
amplitude can be centimeters or meters, or any convenient unit of distance.
FIGURE 16.3 An idealized surface water wave passes under a seagull that bobs up and down in simple harmonic motion. The wave has a