# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 661-665
############################################################

13 • Chapter Review 649
orbiting on the galaxy’s periphery is about 48 . Io orbits Jupiter with an average radius of
light-years from its center. (a) What 421,700 km and a period of 1.769 days. Based
should the orbital period of that star be? (b) If its upon these data, what is the mass of Jupiter?
period is years instead, what is the
49 . The “mean” orbital radius listed for astronomical
mass of the galaxy? Such calculations are used
objects orbiting the Sun is typically not an
to imply the existence of mass that does not
integrated average but is calculated such that it
emit any light. Scientists do not know what it is
gives the correct period when applied to the
comprised of, so this mass is known simply as
equation for circular orbits. Given that, what is
"dark matter" and remains an enduring
the mean orbital radius in terms of aphelion and
astronomical mystery.
perihelion?
43 . (a) In order to keep a small satellite from drifting
50 . The perihelion of Halley’s comet is 0.586 AU and
into a nearby asteroid, it is placed in orbit with a
the aphelion is 17.8 AU. Given that its speed at
period of 3.02 hours and radius of 2.0 km. What
perihelion is 55 km/s, what is the speed at
is the mass of the asteroid? (b) Does this mass
aphelion ( )? (Hint: You
seem reasonable for the size of the orbit?
may use either conservation of energy or angular
44 . The Moon and Earth rotate about their common momentum, but the latter is much easier.)
center of mass, which is located about 4700 km
51 . The perihelion of the comet Lagerkvist is 2.61
from the center of Earth. (This is 1690 km below
AU and it has a period of 7.36 years. Show that
the surface.) (a) Calculate the acceleration due
the aphelion for this comet is 4.95 AU.
to the Moon’s gravity at that point. (b) Calculate
the centripetal acceleration of the center of 52 . What is the ratio of the speed at perihelion to
Earth as it rotates about that point once each that at aphelion for the comet Lagerkvist in the
lunar month (about 27.3 d) and compare it with previous problem?
the acceleration found in part (a). Comment on
53 . Eros has an elliptical orbit about the Sun, with a
whether or not they are equal and why they
perihelion distance of 1.13 AU and aphelion
should or should not be.
distance of 1.78 AU. What is the period of its
45 . The Sun orbits the Milky Way galaxy once each orbit?
, with a roughly circular orbit
13.6 Tidal Forces
averaging a radius of light-years. (A
light-year is the distance traveled by light in 1 54 . (a) What is the difference between the forces on
year.) Calculate the centripetal acceleration of a 1.0-kg mass on the near side of Io and far side
the Sun in its galactic orbit. Does your result due to Jupiter? Io has a mean radius of 1821 km
support the contention that a nearly inertial and a mean orbital radius about Jupiter of
frame of reference can be located at the Sun? (b) 421,700 km. (b) Compare this difference to that
Calculate the average speed of the Sun in its calculated for the difference for Earth due to the
galactic orbit. Does the answer surprise you? Moon calculated in Example 13.14. Tidal forces
are the cause of Io’s volcanic activity.
46 . A geosynchronous Earth satellite is one that has
an orbital period of precisely 1 day. Such orbits 55 . If the Sun were to collapse into a black hole, the
are useful for communication and weather point of no return for an investigator would be
observation because the satellite remains above approximately 3 km from the center singularity.
the same point on Earth (provided it orbits in the Would the investigator be able to survive visiting
equatorial plane in the same direction as Earth’s even 300 km from the center? Answer this by
rotation). Calculate the radius of such an orbit finding the difference in the gravitational
based on the data for Earth in Appendix D. attraction the black holes exerts on a 1.0-kg
mass at the head and at the feet of the
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
investigator.
47 . Calculate the mass of the Sun based on data for
56 . Consider Figure 13.23 in Tidal Forces. This
average Earth’s orbit and compare the value
diagram represents the tidal forces for spring
obtained with the Sun’s commonly listed value
tides. Sketch a similar diagram for neap tides.
of .
(Hint: For simplicity, imagine that the Sun and
the Moon contribute equally. Your diagram

650 13 • Chapter Review
would be the vector sum of two force fields (as of 4 million solar masses?
in Figure 13.23), reduced by a factor of two, and
58 . What would be the Schwarzschild radius, in light
superimposed at right angles.)
years, if our Milky Way galaxy of 1 × 1011 stars
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity collapsed into a black hole? Compare this to our
distance from the center, about 13,000 light
57 . What is the Schwarzschild radius for the black
years.
hole at the center of our galaxy if it has the mass
Additional Problems
59 . A neutron star is a cold, collapsed star with 66 . Find the speed needed to escape from the solar
nuclear density. A particular neutron star has a system starting from the surface of Earth.
mass twice that of our Sun with a radius of 12.0 Assume there are no other bodies involved and
km. (a) What would be the weight of a 100-kg do not account for the fact that Earth is moving
astronaut on standing on its surface? (b) What in its orbit. [Hint: Equation 13.6 does not apply.
does this tell us about landing on a neutron star? Use Equation 13.5 and include the potential
energy of both Earth and the Sun.
60 . (a) How far from the center of Earth would the
net gravitational force of Earth and the Moon on 67 . Consider the previous problem and include the
an object be zero? (b) Setting the magnitudes of fact that Earth has an orbital speed about the
the forces equal should result in two answers Sun of 29.8 km/s. (a) What speed relative to
from the quadratic. Do you understand why Earth would be needed and in what direction
there are two positions, but only one where the should you leave Earth? (b) What will be the
net force is zero? shape of the trajectory?
61 . How far from the center of the Sun would the net 68 . A comet is observed 1.50 AU from the Sun with
gravitational force of Earth and the Sun on a a speed of 24.3 km/s. Is this comet in a bound
spaceship be zero? or unbound orbit?
62 . Calculate the values of g at Earth’s surface for 69 . An asteroid has speed 15.5 km/s when it is
the following changes in Earth’s properties: (a) located 2.00 AU from the sun. At its closest
its mass is doubled and its radius is halved; (b) approach, it is 0.400 AU from the Sun. What is
its mass density is doubled and its radius is its speed at that point?
unchanged; (c) its mass density is halved and its
70 . Space debris left from old satellites and their
mass is unchanged.
launchers is becoming a hazard to other
63 . Suppose you can communicate with the satellites. (a) Calculate the speed of a satellite in
inhabitants of a planet in another solar system. an orbit 900 km above Earth’s surface. (b)
They tell you that on their planet, whose Suppose a loose rivet is in an orbit of the same
diameter and mass are and radius that intersects the satellite’s orbit at an
, respectively, the record for the angle of . What is the velocity of the rivet
high jump is 2.0 m. Given that this record is relative to the satellite just before striking it? (c)
close to 2.4 m on Earth, what would you If its mass is 0.500 g, and it comes to rest inside
conclude about your extraterrestrial friends’ the satellite, how much energy in joules is
jumping ability? generated by the collision? (Assume the
satellite’s velocity does not change appreciably,
64 . (a) Suppose that your measured weight at the
because its mass is much greater than the
equator is one-half your measured weight at the
rivet’s.)
pole on a planet whose mass and diameter are
equal to those of Earth. What is the rotational 71 . A satellite of mass 1000 kg is in circular orbit
period of the planet? (b) Would you need to take about Earth. The radius of the orbit of the
the shape of this planet into account? satellite is equal to two times the radius of
Earth. (a) How far away is the satellite? (b) Find
65 . A body of mass 100 kg is weighed at the North
the kinetic, potential, and total energies of the
Pole and at the equator with a spring scale. What
satellite.
is the scale reading at these two points? Assume
that at the pole. 72 . After Ceres was promoted to a dwarf planet, we
Access for free at openstax.org

13 • Chapter Review 651
now recognize the largest known asteroid to be 77 . Show that for eccentricity equal to one in
Vesta, with a mass of and a Equation 13.10 for conic sections, the path is a
diameter ranging from 458 km to 578 km. parabola. Do this by substituting Cartesian
Assuming that Vesta is spherical with radius 520 coordinates, x and y, for the polar coordinates, r
km, find the approximate escape velocity from and , and showing that it has the general form
its surface. for a parabola, .
73 . (a) Given the asteroid Vesta which has a 78 . Using the technique shown in Satellite Orbits
diameter of 520 km and mass of and Energy, show that two masses and in
, what would be the orbital circular orbits about their common center of
period for a space probe in a circular orbit of mass, will have total energy
10.0 km from its surface? (b) Why is this .
calculation marginally useful at best?
We have shown the kinetic energy of both
74 . What is the orbital velocity of our solar system masses explicitly. (Hint: The masses orbit at radii
about the center of the Milky Way? Assume that and , respectively, where . Be
the mass within a sphere of radius equal to our sure not to confuse the radius needed for
distance away from the center is about a 1 × centripetal acceleration with that for the
1011 solar masses. Our distance from the center gravitational force.)
is 27,000 light years.
79 . Given the perihelion distance, p, and aphelion
75 . (a) Using the information in the previous distance, q, for an elliptical orbit, show that the
problem, what velocity do you need to escape velocity at perihelion, , is given by
the Milky Way galaxy from our present position?
. (Hint: Use conservation of
(b) Would you need to accelerate a spaceship to
this speed relative to Earth? angular momentum to relate and , and
then substitute into the conservation of energy
76 . Circular orbits in Equation 13.10 for conic
equation.)
sections must have eccentricity zero. From this,
and using Newton’s second law applied to 80 . Comet P/1999 R1 has a perihelion of 0.0570 AU
centripetal acceleration, show that the value of and aphelion of 4.99 AU. Using the results of the
in Equation 13.10 is given by previous problem, find its speed at aphelion.
(Hint: The expression is for the perihelion. Use
where L is the angular momentum of the orbiting
symmetry to rewrite the expression for
body. The value of is constant and given by this
aphelion.)
expression regardless of the type of orbit.
Challenge Problems
81 . A tunnel is dug through the center of a perfectly 83 . Show that the areal velocity for a circular orbit of
spherical and airless planet of radius R. Using radius r about a mass M is .
the expression for g derived in Gravitation Near
Does your expression give the correct value for
Earth’s Surface for a uniform density, show that
Earth’s areal velocity about the Sun?
a particle of mass m dropped in the tunnel will
execute simple harmonic motion. Deduce the 84 . Show that the period of orbit for two masses,
period of oscillation of m and show that it has and , in circular orbits of radii and ,
the same period as an orbit at the surface. respectively, about their common center-of-
mass, is given by
82 . Following the technique used in Gravitation Near
Earth’s Surface, find the value of g as a function . (Hint:
of the radius r from the center of a spherical
The masses orbit at radii and , respectively
shell planet of constant density with inner and
where . Use the expression for the
outer radii and . Find g for both
center-of-mass to relate the two radii and note
and for . Assuming the
that the two masses must have equal but
inside of the shell is kept airless, describe travel
opposite momenta. Start with the relationship of
inside the spherical shell planet.
the period to the circumference and speed of

652 13 • Chapter Review
orbit for one of the masses. Use the result of the a distance at the near and the far side of the
previous problem using momenta in the object, due to the gravitation at a distance R
expressions for the kinetic energy.) from M, is given by where
85 . Show that for small changes in height h, such is the distance between the near and far side
that , Equation 13.4 reduces to the and . (b) Assume you are falling feet
expression . first into the black hole at the center of our
galaxy. It has mass of 4 million solar masses.
86 . Using Figure 13.9, carefully sketch a free body
What would be the difference between the force
diagram for the case of a simple pendulum
at your head and your feet at the Schwarzschild
hanging at latitude lambda, labeling all forces
radius (event horizon)? Assume your feet and
acting on the point mass, m. Set up the
head each have mass 5.0 kg and are 2.0 m
equations of motion for equilibrium, setting one
apart. Would you survive passing through the
coordinate in the direction of the centripetal
event horizon?
acceleration (toward P in the diagram), the other
perpendicular to that. Show that the deflection 88 . Find the Hohmann transfer velocities,
angle , defined as the angle between the and , needed for a
pendulum string and the radial direction toward trip to Mars. Use Equation 13.7 to find the
the center of Earth, is given by the expression circular orbital velocities for Earth and Mars.
below. What is the deflection angle at latitude Using Equation 13.4 and the total energy of the
45 degrees? Assume that Earth is a perfect ellipse (with semi-major axis a), given by
sphere. , where is , find the velocities at Earth
the angular velocity of Earth. (perihelion) and at Mars (aphelion) required to
be on the transfer ellipse. The difference, , at
87 . (a) Show that tidal force on a small object of
each point is the velocity boost or transfer
mass m, defined as the difference in the
velocity needed.
gravitational force that would be exerted on m at
Access for free at openstax.org