# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 119-125
############################################################

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 109
3 | THE FIRST LAW OF
THERMODYNAMICS
Figure 3.1 A weak cold front of air pushes all the smog in northeastern China into a giant smog blanket over the Yellow Sea,
as captured by NASA’s Terra satellite in 2012. To understand changes in weather and climate, such as the event shown here, you
need a thorough knowledge of thermodynamics. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Chapter Outline
3.1Thermodynamic Systems
3.2Work, Heat, and Internal Energy
3.3First Law of Thermodynamics
3.4Thermodynamic Processes
3.5Heat Capacities of an Ideal Gas
3.6Adiabatic Processes for an Ideal Gas
Introduction
Heatisthetransferofenergyduetoatemperaturedifferencebetweentwosystems.Heatdescribestheprocessofconverting
fromoneformofenergyintoanother.Acarengine,forexample,burnsgasoline.Heatisproducedwhentheburnedfuelis
chemicallytransformedintomostly CO and H O, whicharegasesatthecombustiontemperature.Thesegasesexert
2 2
a force on a piston through a displacement, doing work and converting the piston’s kinetic energy into a variety of other
forms—into the car’s kinetic energy; into electrical energy to run the spark plugs, radio, and lights; and back into stored
energy in the car’s battery.
Energyisconservedinallprocesses,includingthoseassociatedwiththermodynamicsystems.Therolesofheattransferand
internal energy change vary from process to process and affect how work is done by the system in that process. We will
seethatthefirstlawofthermodynamicsexplainsthatachangeintheinternalenergyofasystemcomesfromchangesin
heatorwork.Understandingthelawsthatgovernthermodynamicprocessesandtherelationshipbetweenthesystemandits
surroundings is therefore paramount in gaining scientific knowledge of energy and energy consumption.

110 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
3.1 | Thermodynamic Systems
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define a thermodynamic system, its boundary, and its surroundings
• Explain the roles of all the components involved in thermodynamics
• Define thermal equilibrium and thermodynamic temperature
• Link an equation of state to a system
A thermodynamic system includes anything whose thermodynamic properties are of interest. It is embedded in its
surroundings or environment; it can exchange heat with, and do work on, its environment through a boundary, which
is the imagined wall that separates the system and the environment (Figure 3.2). In reality, the immediate surroundings
ofthesystemareinteractingwithitdirectlyandthereforehaveamuchstrongerinfluenceonitsbehaviorandproperties.
Forexample,ifwearestudyingacarengine,theburninggasolineinsidethecylinderoftheengineisthethermodynamic
system;thepiston,exhaustsystem,radiator,andairoutsideformthesurroundingsofthesystem.Theboundarythenconsists
of the inner surfaces of the cylinder and piston.
Figure 3.2 (a) A system, which can include any relevant process or value, is self-contained in an area.
The surroundings may also have relevant information; however, the surroundings are important to study
only if the situation is an open system. (b) The burning gasoline in the cylinder of a car engine is an
example of a thermodynamic system.
Normally,asystemmusthavesomeinteractionswithitssurroundings.Asystemiscalledanisolatedorclosedsystemifit
iscompletelyseparatedfromitsenvironment—forexample,agasthatissurroundedbyimmovableandthermallyinsulating
walls.Inreality,aclosedsystemdoesnotexistunlesstheentireuniverseistreatedasthesystem,oritisusedasamodel
foranactualsystemthathasminimalinteractionswithitsenvironment.Mostsystemsareknownasanopensystem,which
can exchange energy and/or matter with its surroundings (Figure 3.3).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 111
Figure 3.3 (a) This boiling tea kettle is an open thermodynamic system. It transfers
heat and matter (steam) to its surroundings. (b) A pressure cooker is a good
approximation to a closed system. A little steam escapes through the top valve to prevent
explosion. (credit a: modification of work by Gina Hamilton; credit b: modification of
work by Jane Whitney)
Whenweexamineathermodynamicsystem,weignorethedifferenceinbehaviorfromplacetoplaceinsidethesystemfor
a given moment. In other words, we concentrate on the macroscopic properties of the system, which are the averages of
themicroscopicpropertiesofallthemoleculesorentitiesinthesystem.Anythermodynamicsystemisthereforetreatedas
acontinuumthathasthesamebehavioreverywhereinside.Weassumethesystemisinequilibrium.Youcouldhave,for
example,atemperaturegradientacrossthesystem.However,whenwediscussathermodynamicsysteminthischapter,we
study those that have uniform properties throughout the system.
Before we can carry out any study on a thermodynamic system, we need a fundamental characterization of the system.
When we studied a mechanical system, we focused on the forces and torques on the system, and their balances dictated
themechanicalequilibriumofthesystem.Inasimilarway,weshouldexaminetheheattransferbetweenathermodynamic
system and its environment or between the different parts of the system, and its balance should dictate the thermal
equilibriumofthesystem.Intuitively,suchabalanceisreachedifthetemperaturebecomesthesamefordifferentobjects
or parts of the system in thermal contact, and the net heat transfer over time becomes zero.
Thus,whenwesaytwoobjects(athermodynamicsystemanditsenvironment,forexample)areinthermalequilibrium,we
meanthattheyareatthesametemperature,aswediscussedinTemperatureandHeat.Letusconsiderthreeobjectsat
temperatures T , T , and T , respectively.Howdoweknowwhethertheyareinthermalequilibrium?Thegoverning
1 2 3
principle here is thezeroth law of thermodynamics, as described inTemperature and Heaton temperature and heat:
If object 1 is in thermal equilibrium with objects 2 and 3, respectively, then objects 2 and 3 must also be in thermal
equilibrium.
Mathematically, we can simply write the zeroth law of thermodynamics as
IfT =T andT =T , thenT =T . (3.1)
1 2 1 3 2 3
Thisisthemostfundamentalwayofdefiningtemperature:Twoobjectsmustbeatthesametemperaturethermodynamically
if the net heat transfer between them is zero when they are put in thermal contact and have reached a thermal equilibrium.
The zeroth law of thermodynamics is equally applicable to the different parts of a closed system and requires that the
temperature everywhere inside the system be the same if the system has reached a thermal equilibrium. To simplify our
discussion,weassumethesystemisuniformwithonlyonetypeofmaterial—forexample,waterinatank.Themeasurable
properties of the system at least include its volume, pressure, and temperature. The range of specific relevant variables
depends upon the system. For example, for a stretched rubber band, the relevant variables would be length, tension, and
temperature.Therelationshipbetweenthesethreebasicpropertiesofthesystemiscalledtheequationofstateofthesystem
and is written symbolicallyfor a closed systemas

112 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
f(p, V, T)=0, (3.2)
whereV,p, andTare the volume, pressure, and temperature of the system at a given condition.
Inprinciple,thisequationofstateexistsforanythermodynamicsystembutisnotalwaysreadilyavailable.Theformsof
f(p, V, T)=0 formanymaterialshavebeendeterminedeitherexperimentallyortheoretically.Intheprecedingchapter,
we saw an example of an equation of state for an ideal gas, f(p, V, T)= pV−nRT =0.
Wehavesofarintroducedseveralphysicalpropertiesthatarerelevanttothethermodynamicsofathermodynamicsystem,
suchasitsvolume,pressure,andtemperature. Wecanseparate thesequantities intotwogenericcategories. Thequantity
associated with an amount of matter is an extensive variable, such as the volume and the number of moles. The other
propertiesofasystemareintensivevariables,suchasthepressureandtemperature.Anextensivevariabledoublesitsvalue
iftheamountofmatterinthesystemdoubles,providedalltheintensivevariablesremainthesame.Forexample,thevolume
ortotalenergyofthesystemdoublesifwedoubletheamountofmatterinthesystemwhileholdingthetemperatureand
pressure of the system unchanged.
3.2 | Work, Heat, and Internal Energy
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the work done by a system, heat transfer between objects, and internal energy
change of a system
• Calculate the work, heat transfer, and internal energy change in a simple process
Wediscussedtheconceptsofworkandenergyearlierinmechanics.Examplesandrelatedissuesofheattransferbetween
different objects have also been discussed in the preceding chapters. Here, we want to expand these concepts to a
thermodynamic system and its environment. Specifically, we elaborated on the concepts of heat and heat transfer in the
previous two chapters. Here, we want to understand how work is done by or to a thermodynamic system; how heat is
transferredbetweenasystemanditsenvironment;andhowthetotalenergyofthesystemchangesundertheinfluenceof
the work done and heat transfer.
Work Done by a System
Aforcecreatedfromanysourcecandoworkbymovinganobjectthroughadisplacement.Thenhowdoesathermodynamic
systemdowork?Figure 3.4showsagasconfinedtoacylinderthathasamovablepistonatoneend.Ifthegasexpands
against the piston, it exerts a force through a distance and does work on the piston. If the piston compresses the gas as
it is moved inward, work is also done—in this case, on the gas. The work associated with such volume changes can be
determinedasfollows:Letthegaspressureonthepistonfacebep.ThentheforceonthepistonduetothegasispA,where
Aistheareaoftheface.Whenthepistonispushedoutwardaninfinitesimaldistancedx,themagnitudeoftheworkdone
by the gas is
dW =Fdx= pAdx.
Since the change in volume of the gas is dV = Adx, this becomes
dW = pdV. (3.3)
For a finite change in volume from V toV , we can integrate this equation from V toV to find the net work:
1 2 1 2
V (3.4)
2
W =∫ pdV.
V
1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics 113
Figure 3.4 The work done by a confined gas in moving a
piston a distancedxis given by dW =Fdx= pdV.
Thisintegralisonlymeaningfulforaquasi-staticprocess,whichmeansaprocessthattakesplaceininfinitesimallysmall
steps,keepingthesystematthermalequilibrium.(Weexaminethisideainmoredetaillaterinthischapter.)Onlythendoes
awell-defined mathematical relationship (theequation ofstate) existbetween thepressureandvolume.Thisrelationship
can be plotted on a pV diagram of pressure versus volume, where the curve is the change of state. We can approximate
suchaprocessasonethatoccursslowly,throughaseriesofequilibriumstates.Theintegralisinterpretedgraphicallyasthe
areaunderthepVcurve(theshadedareaofFigure3.5).Workdonebythegasispositiveforexpansionandnegativefor
compression.
Figure 3.5 When a gas expands slowly from V toV , the
1 2
work done by the system is represented by the shaded area under
thepVcurve.
Consider the two processes involving an ideal gas that are represented by paths AC and ABC in Figure 3.6. The first
processisanisothermalexpansion,withthevolumeofthegaschangingitsvolumefrom V toV .Thisisothermalprocess
1 2
isrepresentedbythecurvebetweenpointsAandC.Thegasiskeptataconstanttemperature Tbykeepingitinthermal
equilibrium with a heat reservoir at that temperature. FromEquation 3.4and the ideal gas law,
V V
2 2
W =∫ pdV =⌠ ⎛nRT⎞ dV.
V ⌡V ⎝ V ⎠
1 1

114 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
Figure 3.6 The pathsABC,AC, andADCrepresent three
different quasi-static transitions between the equilibrium statesA
andC.
Theexpansionisisothermal,soTremainsconstantovertheentireprocess.SincenandRarealsoconstant,theonlyvariable
in the integrand isV, so the work done by an ideal gas in an isothermal process is
V
W =nRT⌠ 2 dV =nRTln V 2.
⌡V V V
1
1
Notice that if V >V (expansion),Wis positive, as expected.
2 1
ThestraightlinesfromAtoBandthenfromBtoCrepresentadifferentprocess.Here,agasatapressure p firstexpands
1
isobarically (constant pressure) and quasi-statically from V toV , after which it cools quasi-statically at the constant
1 2
volume V untilitspressuredropsto p .FromAtoB,thepressureisconstantatp,sotheworkoverthispartofthepath
2 2
is
V V
2 2
W =∫ pdV = p ∫ dV = p (V −V ).
1 1 2 1
V V
1 1
FromBtoC, there is no change in volume and therefore no work is done. The net work over the pathABCis then
W = p (V −V )+0= p (V −V ).
1 2 1 1 2 1
AcomparisonoftheexpressionsfortheworkdonebythegasinthetwoprocessesofFigure3.6showsthattheyarequite
different.Thisillustratesaveryimportantpropertyofthermodynamicwork:Itispathdependent.Wecannotdeterminethe
workdonebyasystemasitgoesfromoneequilibriumstatetoanotherunlessweknowitsthermodynamicpath.Different
values of the work are associated with different paths.
Example 3.1
Isothermal Expansion of a van der Waals Gas
Studies ofavanderWaals gasrequire anadjustment totheideal gaslawthat takes intoconsideration that gas
moleculeshaveadefinitevolume(seeTheKineticTheoryofGases).OnemoleofavanderWaalsgashas
an equation of state
⎛ a ⎞
p+ (V−b)=RT,
⎝ V2⎠
whereaandbaretwoparametersforaspecificgas.Supposethegasexpandsisothermallyandquasi-statically
from volume V to volume V . How much work is done by the gas during the expansion?
1 2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9