# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 272-277
############################################################

264 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
→
dividedbythefactor 2π. Vector k iscalledthe“wavevector”orpropagationvector(thedirectioninwhichaphotonis
moving).Thepropagationvectorshowsthedirectionofthephoton’slinearmomentumvector.Themagnitudeofthewave
→
vectoris k=| k |=2π/λ andiscalledthewavenumber.Noticethatthisequationdoesnotintroduceanynewphysics.
We can verify that the magnitude of the vector inEquation 6.22is the same as that given byEquation 6.18.
The Compton Effect
The Compton effect is the term used for an unusual result observed when X-rays are scattered on some materials. By
classicaltheory,whenanelectromagneticwaveisscatteredoffatoms,thewavelengthofthescatteredradiationisexpected
tobethesameasthewavelengthoftheincidentradiation.Contrarytothispredictionofclassicalphysics,observationsshow
thatwhenX-raysarescatteredoffsomematerials,suchasgraphite,thescatteredX-rayshavedifferentwavelengthsfrom
thewavelength oftheincidentX-rays.Thisclassically unexplainable phenomenonwasstudiedexperimentally byArthur
H.Comptonand his collaborators, and Compton gave its explanation in 1923.
To explain the shift in wavelengths measured in the experiment, Compton used Einstein’s idea of light as a particle. The
Comptoneffecthasaveryimportantplaceinthehistoryofphysicsbecauseitshowsthatelectromagneticradiationcannot
be explained as a purely wave phenomenon. The explanation of the Compton effect gave a convincing argument to the
physicscommunitythatelectromagneticwavescanindeedbehavelikeastreamofphotons,whichplacedtheconceptofa
photon on firm ground.
TheschematicsofCompton’sexperimentalsetupareshowninFigure6.11.Theideaoftheexperimentisstraightforward:
Monochromatic X-rays with wavelength λ are incident on a sample of graphite (the “target”), where they interact with
atomsinsidethesample;theylateremergeasscatteredX-rayswithwavelength λ′. Adetectorplacedbehindthetargetcan
measuretheintensityofradiationscatteredinanydirection θ withrespecttothedirectionoftheincidentX-raybeam.This
scattering angle, θ, istheangle between thedirection ofthescattered beam andthedirection oftheincident beam. In
thisexperiment,weknowtheintensityandthewavelength λ oftheincoming(incident)beam;andforagivenscattering
angle θ, we measure the intensity and the wavelength λ′ of the outgoing (scattered) beam. Typical results of these
measurementsareshowninFigure 6.12,wherethex-axisisthewavelengthofthescatteredX-raysandthey-axisisthe
intensityofthescatteredX-rays,measuredfordifferentscatteringangles(indicatedonthegraphs).Forallscatteringangles
(exceptfor θ=0°), wemeasuretwointensitypeaks.Onepeakislocatedatthewavelength λ, whichisthewavelength
oftheincidentbeam.Theotherpeakislocatedatsomeotherwavelength, λ′. Thetwopeaksareseparatedby Δλ, which
dependsonthescatteringangle θ oftheoutgoingbeam(inthedirectionofobservation).Theseparation Δλ iscalledthe
Compton shift.
Figure 6.11 Experimental setup for studying Compton
scattering.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 265
Figure 6.12 Experimental data show the Compton effect for X-rays scattering off graphite at various angles: The intensity of
the scattered beam has two peaks. One peak appears at the wavelength λ of the incident radiation and the second peak appears
at wavelength λ′. The separation Δλ between the peaks depends on the scattering angle θ, which is the angular position of
the detector inFigure 6.11. The experimental data in this figure are plotted in arbitrary units so that the height of the profile
reflects the intensity of the scattered beam above background noise.
Compton Shift
As given by Compton, the explanation of the Compton shift is that in the target material, graphite, valence electrons are
looselyboundintheatomsandbehavelikefreeelectrons.ComptonassumedthattheincidentX-rayradiationisastream
ofphotons.Anincomingphotoninthisstreamcollideswithavalenceelectroninthegraphitetarget.Inthecourseofthis
collision,theincomingphotontransferssomepartofitsenergyandmomentumtothetargetelectronandleavesthescene
as a scattered photon. This model explains in qualitative terms why the scattered radiation has a longer wavelength than
theincidentradiation.Putsimply,aphotonthathaslostsomeofitsenergyemergesasaphotonwithalowerfrequency,or
equivalently,withalongerwavelength.Toshowthathismodelwascorrect,Comptonusedittoderivetheexpressionfor
theComptonshift.Inhisderivation,heassumedthatbothphotonandelectronarerelativisticparticlesandthatthecollision
obeystwocommonsenseprinciples:(1)theconservationoflinearmomentumand(2)theconservationoftotalrelativistic
energy.
In the following derivation of the Compton shift, E f and → p f denote the energy and momentum, respectively, of an
incident photon with frequency f. The photon collides with a relativistic electron at rest, which means that immediately
before the collision, the electron’s energy is entirely its rest mass energy, m c2. Immediately after the collision, the
0
electron has energy E and momentum → p , both of which satisfy Equation 6.19. Immediately after the collision, the
→
outgoingphotonhasenergy E˜ f, momentum p˜ f, andfrequency f′. Thedirectionoftheincidentphotonishorizontal
fromlefttoright,andthedirectionoftheoutgoingphotonisattheangle θ, asillustratedinFigure6.11.Thescattering
→
angle θ is the angle between the momentum vectors → p f and p˜ f, and we can write their scalar product:
→ → (6.23)
p f· p˜ f = p f p˜ fcosθ.
FollowingCompton’sargument,weassumethatthecollidingphotonandelectronformanisolatedsystem.Thisassumption
isvalidforweaklyboundelectronsthat,toagoodapproximation,canbetreatedasfreeparticles.Ourfirstequationisthe
conservation of energy for the photon-electron system:
E
f
+m
0
c2=E˜
f
+E. (6.24)
The left side of this equation is the energy of the system at the instant immediately before the collision, and the right
side of the equation is the energy of the system at the instant immediately after the collision. Our second equation is the
conservation of linear momentum for the photon–electron system where the electron is at rest at the instant immediately
before the collision:
→ → → (6.25)
p f = p˜ f + p .

266 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
Theleftsideofthisequationisthemomentumofthesystemrightbeforethecollision,andtherightsideoftheequation
isthemomentumofthesystemrightaftercollision.TheentirephysicsofComptonscattering iscontainedinthesethree
precedingequations––theremainingpartisalgebra.Atthispoint,wecouldjumptotheconcludingformulafortheCompton
shift,butitisbeneficialtohighlightthemainalgebraicstepsthatleadtoCompton’sformula,whichwegivehereasfollows.
We start with rearranging the terms inEquation 6.24and squaring it:
2
⎡
⎣
⎛
⎝
E
f
−E˜
f
⎞
⎠
+m
0
c2⎤
⎦
=E2.
In the next step, we substituteEquation 6.19for E2, simplify, and divide both sides by c2 to obtain
2
⎛ ⎝ E f /c−E˜ f /c⎞ ⎠ +2m 0 c⎛ ⎝ E f /c−E˜ f /c⎞ ⎠ = p2.
Now we can useEquation 6.21to express this form of the energy equation in terms of momenta. The result is
2 (6.26)
⎛ ⎝ p f −p˜ f ⎞ ⎠ +2m 0 c⎛ ⎝ p f −p˜ f ⎞ ⎠ = p2.
To eliminate p2, we turn to the momentum equationEquation 6.25, rearrange its terms, and square it to obtain
⎛ ⎝ → p f − → p˜ f ⎞ ⎠ 2 = p2 and ⎛ ⎝ → p f − → p˜ f ⎞ ⎠ 2 = p2 f +p˜2 f −2 → p f· → p˜ f.
Theproductofthemomentum vectors isgivenbyEquation 6.23.Whenwesubstitute thisresult for p2 inEquation
6.26, we obtain the energy equation that contains the scattering angle θ:
2
⎛ ⎝ p f −p˜ f ⎞ ⎠ +2m 0 c⎛ ⎝ p f −p˜ f ⎞ ⎠ = p2 f +p˜2 f −2p f p˜ fcosθ.
With further algebra, this result can be simplified to
1 − p 1 = m 1 c(1−cosθ). (6.27)
p˜ f f 0
Now recall Equation 6.21 and write: 1/p˜
f
=λ′/h and 1/p
f
=λ/h. When these relations are substituted into
Equation 6.27, we obtain the relation for the Compton shift:
h (6.28)
λ′−λ=
m
c(1−cosθ).
0
The factor h/m c is called theCompton wavelengthof the electron:
0
h (6.29)
λ c= m c =0.00243nm=2.43pm.
0
Denoting the shift as Δλ=λ′−λ, the concluding result can be rewritten as
Δλ=λ c(1−cosθ). (6.30)
ThisformulafortheComptonshiftdescribesoutstandinglywelltheexperimentalresultsshowninFigure6.12.Scattering
datameasuredformolybdenum,graphite,calcite,andmanyothertargetmaterialsareinaccordwiththistheoreticalresult.
The nonshifted peak shown in Figure 6.12 is due to photon collisions with tightly bound inner electrons in the target
material.Photonsthatcollidewiththeinnerelectronsofthetargetatomsinfactcollidewiththeentireatom.Inthisextreme
case, the rest mass in Equation 6.29 must be changed to the rest mass of the atom. This type of shift is four orders of
magnitude smaller than the shift caused by collisions with electrons and is so small that it can be neglected.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 267
Comptonscatteringisanexampleofinelasticscattering,inwhichthescatteredradiationhasalongerwavelengththanthe
wavelengthoftheincidentradiation.Intoday’susage,theterm“Comptonscattering”isusedfortheinelasticscatteringof
photonsbyfree,chargedparticles.InComptonscattering,treatingphotonsasparticleswithmomentathatcanbetransferred
tochargedparticlesprovidesthetheoreticalbackgroundtoexplainthewavelengthshiftsmeasuredinexperiments;thisis
the evidence that radiation consists of photons.
Example 6.8
Compton Scattering
An incident 71-pm X-ray is incident on a calcite target. Find the wavelength of the X-ray scattered at a 30°
angle. What is the largest shift that can be expected in this experiment?
Strategy
TofindthewavelengthofthescatteredX-ray,firstwemustfindtheComptonshiftforthegivenscatteringangle,
θ=30°. We use Equation 6.30. Then we add this shift to the incident wavelength to obtain the scattered
wavelength.ThelargestComptonshiftoccursattheangle θ when 1−cosθ hasthelargestvalue,whichisfor
the angle θ=180°.
Solution
The shift at θ=30° is
Δλ=λ c(1−cos30°)=0.134λ c=(0.134)(2.43)pm=0.325pm.
This gives the scattered wavelength:
λ′=λ+Δλ=(71+0.325)pm=71.325pm.
The largest shift is
(Δλ)max=λ c(1−cos180 0 )=2(2.43pm)=4.86pm.
Significance
Thelargestshiftinwavelengthisdetectedforthebackscatteredradiation;however,mostofthephotonsfromthe
incidentbeampassthroughthetargetandonlyasmallfractionofphotonsgetsbackscattered(typically,lessthan
5%). Therefore, these measurements require highly sensitive detectors.
6.8 Check Your Understanding An incident 71-pm X-ray is incident on a calcite target. Find the
wavelength of the X-ray scattered at a 60° angle. What is the smallest shift that can be expected in this
experiment?
6.4 | Bohr’s Model of the Hydrogen Atom
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between the absorption spectrum and the emission spectrum of radiation
emitted by atoms
• Describe the Rutherford gold foil experiment and the discovery of the atomic nucleus
• Explain the atomic structure of hydrogen
• Describe the postulates of the early quantum theory for the hydrogen atom
• Summarize how Bohr’s quantum model of the hydrogen atom explains the radiation spectrum
of atomic hydrogen
Historically, Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom is the very first model of atomic structure that correctly explained the

268 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
radiationspectraofatomichydrogen.Themodelhasaspecialplaceinthehistoryofphysicsbecauseitintroducedanearly
quantumtheory,whichbroughtaboutnewdevelopmentsinscientificthoughtandlaterculminatedinthedevelopmentof
quantummechanics.TounderstandthespecificsofBohr’smodel,wemustfirstreviewthenineteenth-centurydiscoveries
that prompted its formulation.
When we use a prism to analyze white light coming from the sun, several dark lines in the solar spectrum are observed
(Figure6.13).SolarabsorptionlinesarecalledFraunhoferlinesafterJosephvonFraunhofer,whoaccuratelymeasured
their wavelengths. During 1854–1861, Gustav Kirchhoff and Robert Bunsen discovered that for the various chemical
elements,thelineemissionspectrumofanelementexactlymatchesitslineabsorptionspectrum.Thedifferencebetween
theabsorptionspectrumandtheemissionspectrumisexplainedinFigure6.14.Anabsorptionspectrumisobservedwhen
lightpassesthroughagas.Thisspectrumappearsasblacklinesthatoccuronlyatcertainwavelengthsonthebackgroundof
thecontinuousspectrumofwhitelight(Figure6.13).Themissingwavelengthstelluswhichwavelengthsoftheradiation
are absorbed by the gas. The emission spectrum is observed when light is emitted by a gas. This spectrum is seen as
colorfullinesontheblackbackground(seeFigure 6.15andFigure 6.16).Positionsoftheemissionlinestelluswhich
wavelengthsoftheradiationareemittedbythegas.Eachchemicalelementhasitsowncharacteristicemissionspectrum.
For each element, the positions of its emission lines are exactly the same as the positions of its absorption lines. This
meansthatatomsofaspecificelementabsorbradiationonlyatspecificwavelengthsandradiationthatdoesnothavethese
wavelengthsisnotabsorbedbytheelementatall.Thisalsomeansthattheradiationemittedbyatomsofeachelementhas
exactly the same wavelengths as the radiation they absorb.
Figure 6.13 In the solar emission spectrum in the visible range from 380 nm to 710 nm, Fraunhofer lines are observed as
vertical black lines at specific spectral positions in the continuous spectrum. Highly sensitive modern instruments observe
thousands of such lines.
Figure 6.14 Observation of line spectra: (a) setup to observe absorption lines; (b) setup to
observe emission lines. (a) White light passes through a cold gas that is contained in a glass
flask. A prism is used to separate wavelengths of the passed light. In the spectrum of the passed
light, some wavelengths are missing, which are seen as black absorption lines in the continuous
spectrum on the viewing screen. (b) A gas is contained in a glass discharge tube that has
electrodes at its ends. At a high potential difference between the electrodes, the gas glows and
the light emitted from the gas passes through the prism that separates its wavelengths. In the
spectrum of the emitted light, only specific wavelengths are present, which are seen as colorful
emission lines on the screen.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9