# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 309-315
############################################################

Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves 301
ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS
127. Determine the power intensity of radiation per unit wavelengthisusedtoprojectabeamoflightontoacalcium
wavelength emitted at a wavelength of 500.0 nm by a photoelectrode. (a) How many photoelectrons leave the
blackbody at a temperature of 10,000 K. calcium surface per second? (b) What power is carried
away by ejected photoelectrons, given that the work
128. The HCl molecule oscillates at a frequency of 87.0 function of calcium is 2.31 eV? (c) Calculate the
THz. What is the difference (in eV) between its adjacent photocurrent. (d) If the photoelectrode suddenly becomes
energy levels? electricallyinsulatedandthesetupoftwoelectrodesinthe
circuitsuddenlystartstoactlikea2.00-pFcapacitor,how
longwillcurrentflowbeforethecapacitorvoltagestopsit?
129. A quantum mechanical oscillator vibrates at a
frequency of 250.0 THz. What is the minimum energy of
radiation it can emit? 138. The work function for barium is 2.48 eV. Find the
maximum kinetic energy of the ejected photoelectrons
when the barium surface is illuminated with: (a) radiation
130. Inabout5billionyears,thesunwillevolvetoared
emitted by a 100-kW radio station broadcasting at 800
giant.Assumethatitssurfacetemperaturewilldecreaseto
kHz;(b)a633-nmlaserlightemittedfromapowerfulHe-
about half its present value of 6000 K, while its present
Ne laser; and (c) a 434-nm blue light emitted by a small
radius of 7.0×10 8 m will increase to 1.5×1011m hydrogen gas discharge tube.
(which is the current Earth-sun distance). Calculate the
ratio of the total power emitted by the sun in its red giant
139. (a)Calculatethewavelengthofaphotonthathasthe
stage to its present power.
samemomentumasaprotonmovingwith1%ofthespeed
oflightinavacuum.(b)Whatistheenergyofthisphoton
131. Asodiumlampemits2.0Wofradiantenergy,most in MeV? (c) What is the kinetic energy of the proton in
of which has a wavelength of about 589 nm. Estimate the MeV?
number of photons emitted per second by the lamp.
140. (a)Findthemomentumofa100-keVX-rayphoton.
132. Photoelectronsareejectedfromaphotoelectrodeand (b) Find the velocity of a neutron with the same
are detected at a distance of 2.50 cm away from the momentum.(c)Whatistheneutron’skineticenergyineV?
photoelectrode.Theworkfunctionofthephotoelectrodeis
2.71eVandtheincidentradiationhasawavelengthof420
141. The momentum of light, as it is for particles, is
nm.Howlongdoesittakeaphotoelectrontotraveltothe
exactly reversed when a photon is reflected straight back
detector?
from a mirror, assuming negligible recoil of the mirror.
The change in momentum is twice the photon’s incident
133. If the work function of a metal is 3.2 eV, what is momentum,asitisfortheparticles.Supposethatabeamof
themaximumwavelengththataphotoncanhavetoejecta lighthasanintensity 1.0kW/m2 andfallsona −2.0-m2
photoelectron from this metal surface?
area of a mirror and reflects from it. (a) Calculate the
energy reflected in 1.00 s. (b) What is the momentum
134. Theworkfunctionofaphotoelectricsurfaceis2.00 imparted to the mirror? (c) Use Newton’s second law to
eV. What is the maximum speed of the photoelectrons findtheforceonthemirror.(d)Doestheassumptionofno-
emitted from this surface when a 450-nm light falls on it? recoil for the mirror seem reasonable?
135. A 400-nm laser beam is projected onto a calcium 142. Aphotonofenergy5.0keVcollideswithastationary
electrode. The power of the laser beam is 2.00 mW and electron and is scattered at an angle of 60°. What is the
the work function of calcium is 2.31 eV. (a) How many
energy acquired by the electron in the collision?
photoelectronspersecondareejected?(b)Whatnetpower
is carried away by photoelectrons?
143. A 0.75-nm photon is scattered by a stationary
electron. The speed of the electron’s recoil is
136. (a) Calculate the number of photoelectrons per
second that are ejected from a 1.00-mm2 area of sodium 1.5×10 6 m/s. (a)Findthewavelengthshiftofthephoton.
(b) Find the scattering angle of the photon.
metal by a 500-nm radiation with intensity 1.30kW/m2
(the intensity of sunlight above Earth’s atmosphere). (b)
144. FindthemaximumchangeinX-raywavelengththat
Given the work function of the metal as 2.28 eV, what
can occur due to Compton scattering. Does this change
power is carried away by these photoelectrons?
depend on the wavelength of the incident beam?
137. Alaserwithapoweroutputof2.00mWata400-nm

302 Chapter 6 | Photons and Matter Waves
145. A photon of wavelength 700 nm is incident on a 155. Calculate the velocity of a 1.0-µm electron and a
hydrogen atom. When this photon is absorbed, the atom
potential difference used to accelerate it from rest to this
becomesionized.Whatisthelowestpossibleorbitthatthe
velocity.
electron could have occupied before being ionized?
156. In a supercollider at CERN, protons are accelerated
146. What is the maximum kinetic energy of an electron
to velocities of 0.25c. What are their wavelengths at this
such that a collision between the electron and a stationary
speed?Whataretheirkineticenergies?Ifabeamofprotons
hydrogen atom in its ground state is definitely elastic?
were to gain its kinetic energy in only one pass through
a potential difference, how high would this potential
147. Singlyionizedatomichelium He +1 isahydrogen- difference have to be? (Rest mass energy of a proton is
like ion. (a) What is its ground-state radius? (b) Calculate E 0 =938MeV).
theenergiesofitsfourlowestenergystates.(c)Repeatthe
calculations for the Li 2+ ion. 157. Find the de Broglie wavelength of an electron
accelerated from rest in an X-ray tube in the potential
differenceof100keV.(Restmassenergyofanelectronis
148. A triply ionized atom of beryllium Be 3+ is a
E =511keV.)
0
hydrogen-like ion. When Be 3+ is in one of its excited
states, its radius in this nth state is exactly the same as
158. The cutoff wavelength for the emission of
the radius of the first Bohr orbit of hydrogen. Find n and
photoelectrons from a particular surface is 500 nm. Find
compute the ionization energy for this state of Be 3+ . the maximum kinetic energy of the ejected photoelectrons
when the surface is illuminated with light of wavelength
149. Inextreme-temperatureenvironments,suchasthose 450 nm.
existing in a solar corona, atoms may be ionized by
undergoing collisions with other atoms. One example of 159. Compare the wavelength shift of a photon scattered
suchionizationinthesolarcoronaisthepresenceof C 5+ byafreeelectrontothatofaphotonscatteredatthesame
angle by a free proton.
ions, detected in the Fraunhofer spectrum. (a) By what
factor do the energies of the C 5+ ion scale compare to
160. Thespectrometerusedtomeasurethewavelengthsof
the energy spectrum of a hydrogen atom? (b) What is the
thescatteredX-raysintheComptonexperimentisaccurate
wavelengthofthefirstlineinthePaschenseriesof C 5+ to 5.0×10−4nm. Whatistheminimumscatteringangle
? (c) In what part of the spectrum are these lines located?
forwhichtheX-raysinteractingwiththefreeelectronscan
be distinguished from those interacting with the atoms?
150. (a) Calculate the ionization energy for He + . (b)
What is the minimum frequency of a photon capable of 161. Consider a hydrogen-like ion where an electron is
ionizing He + ? orbiting a nucleus that has charge q= +Ze. Derive the
formulasfortheenergy E oftheelectroninnthorbitand
n
151. Experiments are performed with ultracold neutrons the orbital radius r n.
havingvelocitiesassmallas1.00m/s.Findthewavelength
of such an ultracold neutron and its kinetic energy.
162. Assume that a hydrogen atom exists in the n=2
152. Find the velocity and kinetic energy of a 6.0-fm excited state for 10 −8 s before decaying to the ground
neutron.(Restmassenergyofneutronis E =940MeV.) state. How many times does the electron orbit the proton
0
nucleus during this time? How long does it take Earth to
orbit the sun this many times?
153. The spacing between crystalline planes in the NaCl
163. An atom can be formed when a negative muon is
crystal is 0.281 nm, as determined by X-ray diffraction
capturedbyaproton.Themuonhasthesamechargeasthe
with X-rays of wavelength 0.170 nm. What is the energy
electronandamass207timesthatoftheelectron.Calculate
of neutrons in the neutron beam that produces diffraction
thefrequencyofthephotonemittedwhenthisatommakes
peaksatthesamelocationsasthepeaksobtainedwiththe
X-rays?
thetransitionfrom n=2 tothe n=1 state.Assumethat
the muon is orbiting a stationary proton.
154. What is the wavelength of an electron accelerated
from rest in a 30.0-kV potential difference?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics 303
7 | QUANTUM MECHANICS
Figure 7.1 A D-wave qubit processor: The brain of a quantum computer that encodes information in quantum bits to perform
complex calculations. (credit: modification of work by D-Wave Systems, Inc.)
Chapter Outline
7.1Wave Functions
7.2The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
7.3The Schrӧdinger Equation
7.4The Quantum Particle in a Box
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
7.6The Quantum Tunneling of Particles through Potential Barriers
Introduction
Quantum mechanics is a powerful framework for understanding the motions and interactions of particles at small scales,
suchasatomsandmolecules.Theideasbehindquantummechanicsoftenappearquitestrange.Inmanyways,oureveryday
experiencewiththemacroscopicphysicalworlddoesnotprepareusforthemicroscopicworldofquantummechanics.The
purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to this exciting world.
Picturedaboveisaquantum-computerprocessor.Thisdeviceisthe“brain”ofaquantumcomputerthatoperatesatnear-
absolutezerotemperatures.Unlikeadigitalcomputer,whichencodesinformationinbinarydigits(definitestatesofeither
zeroorone),aquantumcomputerencodesinformationinquantumbitsorqubits(mixedstatesofzeroandone).Quantum
computers are discussed in the first section of this chapter.

304 Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics
7.1 | Wave Functions
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the statistical interpretation of the wave function
• Use the wave function to determine probabilities
• Calculate expectation values of position, momentum, and kinetic energy
Intheprecedingchapter,wesawthatparticlesactinsomecaseslikeparticlesandinothercaseslikewaves.Butwhatdoes
it mean for a particle to “act like a wave”? What precisely is “waving”? What rules govern how this wave changes and
propagates?Howisthewavefunctionusedtomakepredictions?Forexample,iftheamplitudeofanelectronwaveisgiven
byafunctionofpositionandtime, Ψ(x, t),definedforallx,whereexactlyistheelectron?Thepurposeofthischapteris
to answer these questions.
Using the Wave Function
Acluetothephysicalmeaningofthewavefunction Ψ(x, t) isprovidedbythetwo-slitinterferenceofmonochromaticlight
(Figure7.2).(SeealsoElectromagneticWaves(http://cnx.org/content/m58495/latest/)andInterference.)The
wave function of a light wave is given by E(x,t), and its energy density is given by |E| 2, where E is the electric field
strength.Theenergyofanindividualphotondependsonlyonthefrequencyoflight, ε =hf, so |E| 2 isproportional
photon
tothenumberofphotons.Whenlightwavesfrom S interferewithlightwavesfrom S attheviewingscreen(adistance
1 2
D away), an interference pattern is produced (part (a) of the figure). Bright fringes correspond to points of constructive
interference of the light waves, and dark fringes correspond to points of destructive interference of the light waves (part
(b)).
Supposethescreenisinitiallyunexposedtolight.Ifthescreenisexposedtoveryweaklight,theinterferencepatternappears
gradually(Figure7.2(c),lefttoright).Individualphotonhitsonthescreenappearasdots.Thedotdensityisexpectedto
belargeatlocationswheretheinterferencepatternwillbe,ultimately,themostintense.Inotherwords,theprobability(per
unitarea)thatasinglephotonwillstrikeaparticularspotonthescreenisproportionaltothesquareofthetotalelectricfield,
|E| 2 atthatpoint.Undertherightconditions,thesameinterferencepatterndevelopsformatterparticles,suchaselectrons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics 305
Figure 7.2 Two-slit interference of monochromatic light. (a) Schematic of two-slit interference; (b) light interference pattern;
(c) interference pattern built up gradually under low-intensity light (left to right).
Visit this interactive simulation (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21intquawavint) to learn more about
quantum wave interference.
Thesquareofthematterwave |Ψ| 2 inonedimensionhasasimilarinterpretationasthesquareoftheelectricfield |E| 2.It
givestheprobabilitythataparticlewillbefoundataparticularpositionandtimeperunitlength,alsocalledtheprobability
density. The probability (P) a particle is found in a narrow interval (x,x + dx) at timetis therefore
P(x, x+dx)=|Ψ(x, t)| 2dx. (7.1)
(Later, we define the magnitude squared for the general case of a function with “imaginary parts.”) This probabilistic
interpretationofthewavefunctioniscalledtheBorninterpretation.Examplesofwavefunctionsandtheirsquaresfora
particular timetare given inFigure 7.3.

306 Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics
Figure 7.3 Several examples of wave functions and the
corresponding square of their wave functions.
If the wave function varies slowly over the interval Δx, the probability a particle is found in the interval is approximately
P(x, x+Δx)≈|Ψ(x, t)| 2Δx. (7.2)
Noticethatsquaringthewavefunctionensuresthattheprobabilityispositive.(Thisisanalogoustosquaringtheelectric
fieldstrength—whichmaybepositiveornegative—toobtainapositivevalueofintensity.)However,ifthewavefunction
does not vary slowly, we must integrate:
x+Δx (7.3)
P(x, x+Δx)= ∫ |Ψ(x, t)| 2dx.
x
Thisprobabilityisjusttheareaunderthefunction |Ψ(x, t)| 2 betweenxand x+Δx.Theprobabilityoffindingtheparticle
“somewhere” (thenormalization condition) is
∞ (7.4)
P(−∞, +∞)= ∫ |Ψ(x, t)| 2dx=1.
−∞
For a particle in two dimensions, the integration is over an area and requires a double integral; for a particle in three
dimensions,theintegrationisoveravolumeandrequiresatripleintegral.Fornow,westicktothesimpleone-dimensional
case.
Example 7.1
Where Is the Ball? (Part I)
AballisconstrainedtomovealongalineinsideatubeoflengthL.Theballisequallylikelytobefoundanywhere
inthetubeatsometimet.Whatistheprobabilityoffindingtheballinthelefthalfofthetubeatthattime?(The
answeris50%,ofcourse,buthowdowegetthisanswerbyusingtheprobabilisticinterpretationofthequantum
mechanical wave function?)
Strategy
Thefirststepistowritedownthewavefunction.Theballisequallyliketobefoundanywhereinthebox,soone
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9