# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 576-584
############################################################

566 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
a significant change in resistance was discovered based on whether an applied magnetic field was on the spin valve or
not.Thislargechangeinresistancecreatesaquickandconsistentwayforrecordingorreadinginformationbyanapplied
current.
Figure 12.28 The inside of a hard disk drive. The silver disk
contains the information, whereas the thin stylus on top of the
disk reads and writes information to the disk.
Example 12.10
Iron Core in a Coil
AlongcoilistightlywoundaroundanironcylinderwhosemagnetizationcurveisshowninFigure 12.25.(a)
If n=20 turnspercentimeter,whatistheappliedfield B when I =0.20A? (b)Whatisthenetmagnetic
0 0
field for this same current? (c) What is the magnetic susceptibility in this case?
Strategy
(a)ThemagneticfieldofasolenoidiscalculatedusingEquation12.28.(b)Thegraphisreadtodeterminethe
net magnetic field for this same current. (c) The magnetic susceptibility is calculated usingEquation 12.37.
Solution
a. The applied field B of the coil is
0
B = µ nI =(4π×10 −7 T·m/A)(2000/m)(0.20A)
0 0 0
B = 5.0×10−4T.
0
b. From inspection of the magnetization curve of Figure 12.25, we see that, for this value of B ,
0
B=1.4T. Noticethattheinternalfieldofthealignedatomsismuchlargerthantheexternallyapplied
field.
c. The magnetic susceptibility is calculated to be
χ = B −1= 1.4T −1=2.8×10 3 .
B
0
5.0×10−4T
Significance
Ferromagnetic materials have susceptibilities in the range of 10 3 which compares well to our results here.
Paramagneticmaterialshavefractionalsusceptibilities,sotheirappliedfieldofthecoilismuchgreaterthanthe
magnetic field generated by the material.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 567
12.8 Check Your UnderstandingRepeat the calculations from the previous example for I =0.040A.
0

568 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
CHAPTER 12 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
Ampère’s law physical law that states that the line integral of the magnetic field around an electric current is
proportional to the current
Biot-Savart law an equation giving the magnetic field at a point produced by a current-carrying wire
diamagnetic materials theirmagneticdipolesalignoppositelytoanappliedmagneticfield;whenthefieldisremoved,
the material is unmagnetized
ferromagnetic materials containgroupsofdipoles,calleddomains,thatalignwiththeappliedmagneticfield;when
this field is removed, the material is still magnetized
hysteresis property of ferromagnets that is seen when a material’s magnetic field is examined versus the applied
magnetic field; a loop is created resulting from sweeping the applied field forward and reverse
magnetic domains groups of magnetic dipoles that are all aligned in the same direction and are coupled together
quantum mechanically
magnetic susceptibility ratio of the magnetic field in the material over the applied field at that time; positive
susceptibilities are either paramagnetic or ferromagnetic (aligned with the field) and negative susceptibilities are
diamagnetic (aligned oppositely with the field)
paramagnetic materials their magnetic dipoles align partially in the same direction as the applied magnetic field;
when this field is removed, the material is unmagnetized
permeability of free space µ , measure of the ability of a material, in this case free space, to support a magnetic
0
field
solenoid thin wire wound into a coil that produces a magnetic field when an electric current is passed through it
toroid donut-shaped coil closely wound around that is one continuous wire
KEY EQUATIONS
Permeability of free space µ =4π×10 −7 T⋅m/A
0
Contribution to magnetic field dB= µ 0 Idlsinθ
from a current element 4π r2
Biot–Savart law → B = µ 0 ⌠ Id → l × ^ r
4π ⌡ r2
wire
Magnetic field due to a µ I
B= 0
long straight wire 2πR
Force between two parallel currents F = µ 0 I 1 I 2
l 2πr
Magnetic field of a current loop µ I
B= 0 (at center of loop)
2R
Ampère’s law → →
∮ B ·d l = µ I
0
Magnetic field strength B= µ nI
0
inside a solenoid
Magnetic field strength inside a toroid µ NI
B= o
2πr
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 569
Magnetic permeability µ =(1+ χ)µ
0
Magnetic field of a solenoid B= µnI
filled with paramagnetic material
SUMMARY
12.1The Biot-Savart Law
• The magnetic field created by a current-carrying wire is found by the Biot-Savart law.
→
• The current element Id l produces a magnetic field a distanceraway.
12.2Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
µ I
• The strength of the magnetic field created by current in a long straight wire is given by B= 0 (long straight
2πR
wire)whereIisthecurrent,Ristheshortestdistancetothewire,andtheconstant µ =4π×10 −7 T⋅m/s isthe
0
permeability of free space.
• Thedirectionofthemagneticfieldcreatedbyalongstraightwireisgivenbyright-handrule2(RHR-2):Pointthe
thumboftherighthandinthedirectionofcurrent,andthefingerscurlinthedirectionofthemagneticfieldloops
created by it.
12.3Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
• The force between two parallel currents I and I , separated by a distance r, has a magnitude per unit length
1 2
given by F = µ 0 I 1 I 2.
l 2πr
• The force is attractive if the currents are in the same direction, repulsive if they are in opposite directions.
12.4Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
µ I
• Themagneticfieldstrengthatthecenterofacircularloopisgivenby B= 0 (at center of loop), whereRis
2R
the radius of the loop. RHR-2 gives the direction of the field about the loop.
12.5Ampère’s Law
• Themagneticfieldcreatedbycurrentfollowinganypathisthesum(orintegral)ofthefieldsduetosegmentsalong
thepath(magnitudeanddirectionasforastraightwire),resultinginageneralrelationshipbetweencurrentandfield
known as Ampère’s law.
• Ampère’s law can be used to determine the magnetic field from a thin wire or thick wire by a geometrically
convenient path of integration. The results are consistent with the Biot-Savart law.
12.6Solenoids and Toroids
• The magnetic field strength inside a solenoid is
B= µ nI (inside a solenoid)
0
wherenisthenumberofloopsperunitlengthofthesolenoid.Thefieldinsideisveryuniforminmagnitudeand
direction.
• The magnetic field strength inside a toroid is
µ NI
B= o (within the toroid)
2πr

570 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
whereNis the number of windings. The field inside a toroid is not uniform and varies with the distance as 1/r.
12.7Magnetism in Matter
• Materials are classified as paramagnetic, diamagnetic, or ferromagnetic, depending on how they behave in an
applied magnetic field.
• Paramagnetic materials have partial alignment oftheir magnetic dipoles with anapplied magnetic field. This isa
positive magnetic susceptibility. Only a surface current remains, creating a solenoid-like magnetic field.
• Diamagnetic materials exhibit induced dipoles opposite to an applied magnetic field. This is a negative magnetic
susceptibility.
• Ferromagnetic materials have groups of dipoles, called domains, which align with the applied magnetic field.
However, when the field is removed, the ferromagnetic material remains magnetized, unlike paramagnetic
materials. This magnetization of the material versus the applied field effect is called hysteresis.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
12.1The Biot-Savart Law 12.4Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
1. Forcalculatingmagneticfields,whataretheadvantages 8. Is the magnetic field of a current loop uniform?
and disadvantages of the Biot-Savart law?
9. Whathappenstothelengthofasuspendedspringwhen
2. Describe the magnetic field due to the current in two a current passes through it?
wiresconnectedtothetwoterminalsofasourceofemfand
twisted tightly around each other. 10. Twoconcentriccircularwireswithdifferentdiameters
carrycurrentsinthesamedirection.Describetheforceon
3. How can you decide if a wire is infinite? the inner wire.
4. Identical currents are carried in two circular loops;
however,oneloophastwicethediameterastheotherloop. 12.5Ampère’s Law
Compare the magnetic fields created by the loops at the
11. IsAmpère’slawvalidforallclosedpaths?Whyisn’t
center of each loop.
it normally useful for calculating a magnetic field?
12.2Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
12.6Solenoids and Toroids
5. How would you orient two long, straight, current-
12. Is the magnetic field inside a toroid completely
carrying wires so that there is no net magnetic force
uniform? Almost uniform?
between them? (Hint: What orientation would lead to one
wire not experiencing a magnetic field from the other?)
→
13. Explain why B =0 inside a long, hollow copper
pipethatiscarryinganelectriccurrentparalleltotheaxis.
12.3Magnetic Force between Two Parallel →
Is B =0 outside the pipe?
Currents
6. Compare and contrast the electric field of an infinite
line of charge and the magnetic field of an infinite line of 12.7Magnetism in Matter
current. 14. A diamagnetic material is brought close to a
permanent magnet. What happens to the material?
→
7. Is B constant in magnitude for points that lie on a
15. Ifyoucutabarmagnetintotwopieces,willyouend
magnetic field line?
upwithonemagnetwithanisolatednorthpoleandanother
magnet with an isolated south pole? Explain your answer.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 571
PROBLEMS
12.1The Biot-Savart Law
16. A 10-A current flows through the wire shown. What
is the magnitude of the magnetic field due to a 0.5-mm
segmentofwireasmeasuredat(a)pointAand(b)pointB?
20. Find the magnetic field at the center C of the
rectangularloopofwireshownintheaccompanyingfigure.
17. Tenampsflowthroughasquareloopwhereeachside
is20cminlength.Ateachcorneroftheloopisa0.01-cm
segmentthatconnectsthelongerwiresasshown.Calculate
the magnitude of the magnetic field at the center of the
loop.
21. Twolongwires,oneofwhichhasasemicircularbend
of radius R, are positioned as shown in the accompanying
figure. If both wires carry a current I, how far apart must
their parallel sections be so that the net magnetic field at
Piszero?Doesthecurrentinthestraightwireflowupor
down?
18. WhatisthemagneticfieldatPduetothecurrentIin
the wire shown?
19. The accompanying figure shows a current loop
consisting of two concentric circular arcs and two
perpendicularradiallines.Determinethemagneticfieldat
point P.
12.2Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
22. A typical current in a lightning bolt is 104 A.
Estimate the magnetic field 1 m from the bolt.

572 Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields
23. The magnitude of the magnetic field 50 cm from a (a) If each wire carries a current of 50 A in the same
long, thin, straight wire is 8.0µT. What is the current direction, what isthe magnetic force permeter exerted on
each wire? (b) Does the force pull the wires together or
through the long wire?
pushthem apart? (c)What happensifthecurrents flowin
opposite directions?
24. A transmission line strung 7.0 m above the ground
carriesacurrentof500A.Whatisthemagneticfieldonthe
31. Twolong,straightwiresareparalleland10cmapart.
grounddirectlybelowthewire?Compareyouranswerwith
One carries a current of 2.0 A, the other a current of 5.0
the magnetic field of Earth.
A.(a)Ifthetwocurrentsflowinoppositedirections,what
isthemagnitude anddirection oftheforceperunitlength
25. Along,straight,horizontalwirecarriesaleft-to-right
of one wire on the other? (b) What is the magnitude and
currentof20A.Ifthewireisplacedinauniformmagnetic
directionoftheforceperunitlengthifthecurrentsflowin
fieldofmagnitude 4.0×10 −5 T thatisdirectedvertically the same direction?
downward,whatistheresultantmagnitudeofthemagnetic
field 20 cm above the wire? 20 cm below the wire? 32. Two long, parallel wires are hung by cords of length
5.0 cm, as shown in the accompanying figure. Each wire
26. The two long, parallel wires shown in the has a mass per unit length of 30 g/m, and they carry the
accompanying figure carry currents in the same direction. same current in opposite directions. What is the current if
If I =10 A and I =20A, whatisthemagneticfield the cords hang at 6.0° with respect to the vertical?
1 2
at point P?
27. The accompanying figure shows two long, straight,
horizontalwiresthatareparallelandadistance2aapart.If
bothwirescarrycurrentIinthesamedirection,(a)whatis
the magnetic field at P ? (b) P ?
1 2
33. A circuit with current I has two long parallel wire
sections that carry current in opposite directions. Find
magneticfieldatapointPnearthesewiresthatisadistance
afromonewireandbfromtheotherwireasshowninthe
figure.
28. Repeatthecalculationsoftheprecedingproblemwith
34. Theinfinite,straightwireshownintheaccompanying
the direction of the current in the lower wire reversed.
figure carries a current I . The rectangular loop, whose
1
29. Considertheareabetweenthewiresofthepreceding long sides are parallel to the wire, carries a current I .
2
problem. At what distance from the top wire is the net What are the magnitude and direction of the force on the
magnetic field a minimum? Assume that the currents are rectangular loop due to the magnetic field of the wire?
equal and flow in opposite directions.
12.3Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Currents
30. Twolong,straightwiresareparalleland25cmapart.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 12 | Sources of Magnetic Fields 573
→ →
42. Evaluate ∮ B ·d l foreachofthecasesshownin
the accompanying figure.
12.4Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
35. Whenthecurrentthroughacircularloopis6.0A,the
magnetic field at its center is 2.0×10−4T. What is the
radius of the loop?
36. How many turns must be wound on a flat, circular
coilofradius20cminordertoproduceamagneticfieldof
magnitude 4.0×10 −5 T atthecenterofthecoilwhenthe
current through it is 0.85 A?
37. A flat, circular loop has 20 turns. The radius of the
loopis10.0cmandthecurrentthroughthewireis0.50A.
Determinethemagnitudeofthemagneticfieldatthecenter
of the loop.
38. AcircularloopofradiusRcarriesacurrentI.Atwhat
distancealongtheaxisoftheloopisthemagneticfieldone-
half its value at the center of the loop?
39. Two flat, circular coils, each with a radius R and
wound with N turns, are mounted along the same axis
so that they are parallel a distance d apart. What is the
magnetic field at the midpoint of the common axis if a
currentIflows in the same direction through each coil?
40. For the coils in the preceding problem, what is the
magnetic field at the center of either coil?
12.5Ampère’s Law
41. A current I flows around the rectangular loop shown
→ → 43. The coil whose lengthwise cross section is shown
intheaccompanyingfigure.Evaluate ∮ B ·d l forthe
in the accompanying figure carries a current I and has N
pathsA,B,C, andD. evenlyspacedturnsdistributedalongthelengthl.Evaluate
→ →
∮ B ·d l for the paths indicated.