# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 43-50
############################################################

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 33
L L
f v
Gold 1063 64.5 15.4 2660 1578 377
Copper 1083 134 32.0 2595 5069 1211
Uranium 1133 84 20 3900 1900 454
Tungsten 3410 184 44 5900 4810 1150
Table 1.4Heats of Fusion and Vaporization[1] [1]Values quoted at the normal melting and boiling
temperatures at standard atmospheric pressure (1atm).[2]Helium has no solid phase at atmospheric pressure.
The melting point given is at a pressure of 2.5 MPa.[3]At 37.0°C (body temperature), the heat of vaporization
L v for water is 2430 kJ/kg or 580 kcal/kg.[4]At 37.0°C (body temperature), the heat of vaporization, L v for
water is 2430 kJ/kg or 580 kcal/kg.
Phasechangescanhaveastrongstabilizingeffectontemperaturesthatarenotnearthemeltingandboilingpoints,since
evaporationandcondensationoccurevenattemperaturesbelowtheboilingpoint.Forexample,airtemperaturesinhumid
climates rarely go above approximately 38.0°C because most heat transfer goes into evaporating water into the air.
Similarly, temperatures in humid weather rarely fall below the dew point—the temperature where condensation occurs
given the concentration of water vapor in the air—because so much heat is released when water vapor condenses.
Moreenergyisrequiredtoevaporatewaterbelowtheboilingpointthanattheboilingpoint,becausethekineticenergyof
watermoleculesattemperaturesbelow 100°C islessthanthatat 100°C,solessenergyisavailablefromrandomthermal
motions.Forexample,atbodytemperature,evaporationofsweatfromtheskinrequiresaheatinputof2428kJ/kg,which
is about 10% higher than the latent heat of vaporization at 100°C. This heat comes from the skin, and this evaporative
coolingeffectofsweatinghelpsreducethebodytemperatureinhotweather.However,highhumidityinhibitsevaporation,
so that body temperature might rise, while unevaporated sweat might be left on your brow.
Example 1.9
Calculating Final Temperature from Phase Change
Threeicecubesareusedtochillasodaat 20°C withmass m =0.25kg.Theiceisat 0°C andeachice
soda
cubehasamassof6.0g.Assumethatthesodaiskeptinafoamcontainersothatheatlosscanbeignoredand
that the soda has the same specific heat as water. Find the final temperature when all ice has melted.
Strategy
The ice cubes are at the melting temperature of 0°C. Heat is transferred fromthe soda tothe ice formelting.
Meltingyieldswaterat 0°C, somoreheatistransferredfromthesodatothiswateruntilthewaterplussoda
system reaches thermal equilibrium.
The heat transferred to the ice is
Q =m L +m c ⎛T −0°C⎞.
ice ice f ice W⎝ f ⎠
The heat given off by the soda is
Q =m c ⎛T −20°C⎞.
soda soda W⎝ f ⎠
Since no heat is lost, Q =−Q , as inExample 1.7, so that
ice soda
m L +m c ⎛T −0°C⎞=−m c ⎛T −20°C⎞.
ice f ice W⎝ f ⎠ soda W⎝ f ⎠
Solve for the unknown quantity T :
f
T =
m
soda
c w(20°C)−m
ice
L
f.
f (m
soda
+m
ice
)c
w

34 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
Solution
Firstweidentifytheknownquantities.Themassoficeis m =3×6.0g=0.018kg andthemassofsodais
ice
m =0.25kg. Then we calculate the final temperature:
soda
20,930J−6012J
T = =13°C.
f 1122J/°C
Significance
Thisexampleillustratesthelargeenergiesinvolvedduringaphasechange.Themassoficeisabout7%ofthe
massofthesodabutleadstoanoticeablechangeinthetemperatureofthesoda.Althoughweassumedthatthe
icewasatthefreezingtemperature,thisisunrealisticforicestraightoutofafreezer:Thetypicaltemperatureis
−6°C. However, this correction makes no significant change from the result we found. Can you explain why?
Like solid-liquid and and liquid-vapor transitions, direct solid-vapor transitions or sublimations involve heat. The energy
transferredisgivenbytheequation Q=mL
s
,where L
s
istheheatofsublimation,analogousto L
f
and L
v
.Theheat
of sublimation at a given temperature is equal to the heat of fusion plus the heat of vaporization at that temperature.
Wecannowcalculateanynumberofeffectsrelatedtotemperatureandphasechange.Ineachcase,itisnecessarytoidentify
whichtemperatureandphasechangesaretakingplace.Keepinmindthatheattransferandworkcancausebothtemperature
and phase changes.
Problem-Solving Strategy: The Effects of Heat Transfer
1. Examinethesituationtodeterminethatthereisachangeinthetemperatureorphase.Isthereheattransferinto
oroutofthesystem?Whenitisnotobviouswhetheraphasechangeoccursornot,youmaywishtofirstsolve
theproblemasiftherewerenophasechanges,andexaminethetemperaturechangeobtained.Ifitissufficient
totakeyoupastaboilingormeltingpoint,youshouldthengobackanddotheprobleminsteps—temperature
change, phase change, subsequent temperature change, and so on.
2. Identify and list all objects that change temperature or phase.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
4. Makealistofwhatisgivenorwhatcanbeinferredfromtheproblemasstated(identifytheknowns).Ifthere
isatemperature change,thetransferred heatdependsonthespecific heatofthesubstance (Heat Transfer,
SpecificHeat,andCalorimetry),andifthereisaphasechange,thetransferredheatdependsonthelatent
heat of the substance (Table 1.4).
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown).
6. Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions
completewithunits.Youmayneedtodothisinstepsifthereismorethanonestatetotheprocess,suchasa
temperaturechangefollowedbyaphasechange.However,inacalorimetryproblem,eachstepcorrespondsto
a term in the single equation Q +Q =0.
hot cold
7. Checktheanswertoseeifitisreasonable.Doesitmakesense?Asanexample,becertainthatanytemperature
change does not also cause a phase change that you have not taken into account.
1.5 CheckYourUnderstandingWhydoessnowoftenremainevenwhendaytimetemperaturesarehigher
than the freezing temperature?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 35
1.6 | Mechanisms of Heat Transfer
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain some phenomena that involve conductive, convective, and radiative heat transfer
• Solve problems on the relationships between heat transfer, time, and rate of heat transfer
• Solve problems using the formulas for conduction and radiation
Just as interesting as the effects of heat transfer on a system are the methods by which it occurs. Whenever there is a
temperaturedifference,heattransferoccurs.Itmayoccurrapidly,asthroughacookingpan,orslowly,asthroughthewalls
ofapicnicicechest.Somanyprocessesinvolveheattransferthatitishardtoimagineasituationwherenoheattransfer
occurs. Yet every heat transfer takes place by only three methods:
1. Conduction is heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact. (The matter is stationary on a
macroscopic scale—we know that thermal motion of the atoms and molecules occurs at any temperature above
absolute zero.) Heat transferred from the burner of a stove through the bottom of a pan to food in the pan is
transferred byconduction.
2. Convection is the heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of a fluid. This type of transfer takes place in a
forced-air furnace and in weather systems, for example.
3. Heat transfer by radiation occurs when microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, or another form of
electromagneticradiationisemittedorabsorbed.AnobviousexampleisthewarmingofEarthbytheSun.Aless
obvious example is thermal radiation from the human body.
In the illustration at the beginning of this chapter, the fire warms the snowshoers’ faces largely by radiation. Convection
carriessomeheattothem,butmostoftheairflowfromthefireisupward(creatingthefamiliarshapeofflames),carrying
heattothefoodbeingcookedandintothesky.Thesnowshoerswearclothesdesignedwithlowconductivitytopreventheat
flow out of their bodies.
In this section, we examine these methods in some detail. Each method has unique and interesting characteristics, but
all three have two things in common: They transfer heat solely because of a temperature difference, and the greater the
temperature difference, the faster the heat transfer (Figure 1.19).

36 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
Figure 1.19 In a fireplace, heat transfer occurs by all three methods:
conduction, convection, and radiation. Radiation is responsible for most of
the heat transferred into the room. Heat transfer also occurs through
conduction into the room, but much slower. Heat transfer by convection
also occurs through cold air entering the room around windows and hot air
leaving the room by rising up the chimney.
1.6
Check Your Understanding Name an example from daily life (different from the text) for each
mechanism of heat transfer.
Conduction
Asyouwalkbarefootacrossthelivingroomcarpetinacoldhouseandthenstepontothekitchentilefloor,yourfeetfeel
colder on the tile. This result is intriguing, since the carpet and tile floor are both at the same temperature. The different
sensationisexplainedbythedifferentratesofheattransfer:Theheatlossisfasterforskinincontactwiththetilesthanwith
the carpet, so the sensation of cold is more intense.
Somematerialsconductthermalenergyfasterthanothers.Figure1.20showsamaterialthatconductsheatslowly—itisa
good thermal insulator, or poor heat conductor—used to reduce heat flow into and out of a house.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 37
Figure 1.20 Insulation is used to limit the conduction of heat
from the inside to the outside (in winter) and from the outside to
the inside (in summer). (credit: Giles Douglas)
A molecular picture of heat conduction will help justify the equation that describes it. Figure 1.21 shows molecules in
two bodies at different temperatures, T
h
and T c, for “hot” and “cold.” The average kinetic energy of a molecule in
the hot body is higher than in the colder body. If two molecules collide, energy transfers from the high-energy to the
low-energymolecule.Inametal,thepicturewouldalsoincludefreevalenceelectronscollidingwitheachotherandwith
atoms, likewise transferring energy. The cumulative effect of all collisions is a net flux of heat from the hotter body to
the colder body. Thus, the rate of heat transfer increases with increasing temperature difference ΔT =T
h
−T c. If the
temperaturesarethesame,thenetheattransferrateiszero.Becausethenumberofcollisionsincreaseswithincreasingarea,
heat conduction is proportional to the cross-sectional area—a second factor in the equation.

38 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
Figure 1.21 Molecules in two bodies at different temperatures
have different average kinetic energies. Collisions occurring at
the contact surface tend to transfer energy from high-
temperature regions to low-temperature regions. In this
illustration, a molecule in the lower-temperature region (right
side) has low energy before collision, but its energy increases
after colliding with a high-energy molecule at the contact
surface. In contrast, a molecule in the higher-temperature region
(left side) has high energy before collision, but its energy
decreases after colliding with a low-energy molecule at the
contact surface.
Athirdquantitythataffectstheconductionrateisthethicknessofthematerialthroughwhichheattransfers.Figure1.22
showsaslabofmaterialwithahighertemperatureontheleftthanontheright.Heattransfersfromthelefttotherightby
aseriesofmolecularcollisions.Thegreaterthedistancebetweenhotandcold,themoretimethematerialtakestotransfer
the same amount of heat.
Figure 1.22 Heat conduction occurs through any material, represented here by a
rectangular bar, whether window glass or walrus blubber.
All four of these quantities appear in a simple equation deduced from and confirmed by experiments. The rate of
conductive heat transferthrough a slab of material, such as the one inFigure 1.22, is given by
P=
dQ
=
kA⎛
⎝
T
h
−T
c
⎞
⎠
(1.9)
dT d
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 39
wherePisthepowerorrateofheattransferinwattsorinkilocaloriespersecond,Aanddareitssurfaceareaandthickness,
asshowninFigure1.22, T
h
−T
c
isthetemperaturedifferenceacrosstheslab,andkisthethermalconductivityofthe
material.Table 1.5gives representative values of thermal conductivity.
More generally, we can write
dT
P=−kA ,
dx
where x is the coordinate in the direction of heat flow. Since in Figure 1.22, the power and area are constant, dT/dx is
constant, and the temperature decreases linearly from T
h
to T c.
Substance Thermal Conductivityk (W/m·°C)
Diamond 2000
Silver 420
Copper 390
Gold 318
Aluminum 220
Steel iron 80
Steel (stainless) 14
Ice 2.2
Glass (average) 0.84
Concrete brick 0.84
Water 0.6
Fatty tissue (without blood) 0.2
Asbestos 0.16
Plasterboard 0.16
Wood 0.08–0.16
Snow (dry) 0.10
Cork 0.042
Glass wool 0.042
Wool 0.04
Down feathers 0.025
Air 0.023
Polystyrene foam 0.010
Table 1.5Thermal Conductivities of Common Substances Values are
given for temperatures near 0°C.
Example 1.10
Calculating Heat Transfer through Conduction
A polystyrene foam icebox has a total area of 0.950m2 and walls with an average thickness of2.50cm. The
boxcontainsice,water,andcannedbeveragesat 0°C. Theinsideoftheboxiskeptcoldbymeltingice.How
much ice melts in one day if the icebox is kept in the trunk of a car at 35.0ºC?