# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 21-26
############################################################

1.1 • The Scope and Scale of Physics 9
103 because which rounds to 3 as well. Thus, we say the numbers 800 and 450 are of the same
order of magnitude: 103. However, the order of magnitude of 250 is 102 because which rounds
to 2.
An equivalent but quicker way to find the order of magnitude of a number is first to write it in scientific notation and
then check to see whether the first factor is greater than or less than The idea is that
is halfway between and on a log base-10 scale. Thus, if the first factor is less than
then we round it down to 1 and the order of magnitude is simply whatever power of 10 is required to write the
number in scientific notation. On the other hand, if the first factor is greater than then we round it up to 10 and
the order of magnitude is one power of 10 higher than the power needed to write the number in scientific notation.
For example, the number 800 can be written in scientific notation as Because 8 is bigger than
we say the order of magnitude of 800 is The number 450 can be written as so its order of
magnitude is also 103 because 4.5 is greater than 3. However, 250 written in scientific notation is and
2.5 is less than 3, so its order of magnitude is
The order of magnitude of a number is designed to be a ballpark estimate for the scale (or size) of its value. It is
simply a way of rounding numbers consistently to the nearest (on a logarithmic scale) power of 10. In other words, if
numbers differ by one order of magnitude, the one is larger than the other by a multiplicative factor of about ten.
This makes doing rough mental math with very big and very small numbers easier. For example, the diameter of a
hydrogen atom is on the order of 10−10 m, whereas the diameter of the Sun is on the order of 109 m, so it would
take roughly hydrogen atoms to stretch across the diameter of the Sun. This is much easier to do
in your head than using the more precise values of for a hydrogen atom diameter and
for the Sun’s diameter, to find that it would take hydrogen atoms to stretch across the
Sun’s diameter. In addition to being easier, the rough estimate is also nearly as informative as the precise
calculation.
Known ranges of length, mass, and time
The vastness of the universe and the breadth over which physics applies are illustrated by the wide range of
examples of known lengths, masses, and times (given as orders of magnitude) in Figure 1.4. Examining this table
will give you a feeling for the range of possible topics in physics and numerical values. A good way to appreciate the
vastness of the ranges of values in Figure 1.4 is to try to answer some simple comparative questions, such as the
following:
• How many hydrogen atoms does it take to stretch across the diameter of the Sun?
(Answer: 109 m/10–10 m = 1019 hydrogen atoms)
• How many protons are there in a bacterium?
(Answer: 10–15 kg/10–27 kg = 1012 protons)
• How many floating-point operations can a supercomputer do in 1 day?
(Answer: 105 s/10–17 s = 1022 floating-point operations)
In studying Figure 1.4, take some time to come up with similar questions that interest you and then try answering
them. Doing this can breathe some life into almost any table of numbers.

10 1 • Units and Measurement
FIGURE 1.4 This table shows the orders of magnitude of length, mass, and time.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/21scaleuniv) to explore interactively the vast range of length scales in our
universe. Scroll down and up the scale to view hundreds of organisms and objects, and click on the individual
objects to learn more about each one.
Building Models
How did we come to know the laws governing natural phenomena? What we refer to as the laws of nature are
concise descriptions of the universe around us. They are human statements of the underlying laws or rules that all
natural processes follow. Such laws are intrinsic to the universe; humans did not create them and cannot change
them. We can only discover and understand them. Their discovery is a very human endeavor, with all the elements
of mystery, imagination, struggle, triumph, and disappointment inherent in any creative effort (Figure 1.5). The
cornerstone of discovering natural laws is observation; scientists must describe the universe as it is, not as we
imagine it to be.
Access for free at openstax.org

1.1 • The Scope and Scale of Physics 11
FIGURE 1.5 (a) Enrico Fermi (1901–1954) was born in Italy. On accepting the Nobel Prize in Stockholm in 1938 for his work on artificial
radioactivity produced by neutrons, he took his family to America rather than return home to the government in power at the time. He
became an American citizen and was a leading participant in the Manhattan Project. (b) Marie Curie (1867–1934) sacrificed monetary
assets to help finance her early research and damaged her physical well-being with radiation exposure. She is the only person to win Nobel
prizes in both physics and chemistry. One of her daughters also won a Nobel Prize. (credit a: modification of work by United States
Department of Energy)
A model is a representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly. Although a
model is justified by experimental tests, it is only accurate in describing certain aspects of a physical system. An
example is the Bohr model of single-electron atoms, in which the electron is pictured as orbiting the nucleus,
analogous to the way planets orbit the Sun (Figure 1.6). We cannot observe electron orbits directly, but the mental
image helps explain some of the observations we can make, such as the emission of light from hot gases (atomic
spectra). However, other observations show that the picture in the Bohr model is not really what atoms look like.
The model is “wrong,” but is still useful for some purposes. Physicists use models for a variety of purposes. For
example, models can help physicists analyze a scenario and perform a calculation or models can be used to
represent a situation in the form of a computer simulation. Ultimately, however, the results of these calculations and
simulations need to be double-checked by other means—namely, observation and experimentation.
FIGURE 1.6 What is a model? The Bohr model of a single-electron atom shows the electron orbiting the nucleus in one of several possible
circular orbits. Like all models, it captures some, but not all, aspects of the physical system.
The word theory means something different to scientists than what is often meant when the word is used in
everyday conversation. In particular, to a scientist a theory is not the same as a “guess” or an “idea” or even a
“hypothesis.” The phrase “it’s just a theory” seems meaningless and silly to scientists because science is founded
on the notion of theories. To a scientist, a theory is a testable explanation for patterns in nature supported by
scientific evidence and verified multiple times by various groups of researchers. Some theories include models to

12 1 • Units and Measurement
help visualize phenomena whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of gravity, for example, does not require a model
or mental image, because we can observe the objects directly with our own senses. Although models are meant only
to describe certain aspects of a physical system accurately, a theory should describe all aspects of any system that
falls within its domain of applicability. In particular, any experimentally testable implication of a theory should be
verified. If an experiment ever shows an implication of a theory to be false, then the theory is either thrown out or
modified suitably (for example, by limiting its domain of applicability).
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature supported by scientific evidence and
repeated experiments. Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical equation. Laws and
theories are similar in that they are both scientific statements that result from a tested hypothesis and are
supported by scientific evidence. However, the designation law is usually reserved for a concise and very general
statement that describes phenomena in nature, such as the law that energy is conserved during any process, or
Newton’s second law of motion, which relates force (F), mass (m), and acceleration (a) by the simple equation
A theory, in contrast, is a less concise statement of observed behavior. For example, the theory of evolution
and the theory of relativity cannot be expressed concisely enough to be considered laws. The biggest difference
between a law and a theory is that a theory is much more complex and dynamic. A law describes a single action
whereas a theory explains an entire group of related phenomena. Less broadly applicable statements are usually
called principles (such as Pascal’s principle, which is applicable only in fluids), but the distinction between laws and
principles often is not made carefully.
The models, theories, and laws we devise sometimes imply the existence of objects or phenomena that are as yet
unobserved. These predictions are remarkable triumphs and tributes to the power of science. It is the underlying
order in the universe that enables scientists to make such spectacular predictions. However, if experimentation
does not verify our predictions, then the theory or law is wrong, no matter how elegant or convenient it is. Laws can
never be known with absolute certainty because it is impossible to perform every imaginable experiment to confirm
a law for every possible scenario. Physicists operate under the assumption that all scientific laws and theories are
valid until a counterexample is observed. If a good-quality, verifiable experiment contradicts a well-established law
or theory, then the law or theory must be modified or overthrown completely.
The study of science in general, and physics in particular, is an adventure much like the exploration of an uncharted
ocean. Discoveries are made; models, theories, and laws are formulated; and the beauty of the physical universe is
made more sublime for the insights gained.
1.2 Units and Standards
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how SI base units are defined.
• Describe how derived units are created from base units.
• Express quantities given in SI units using metric prefixes.
As we saw previously, the range of objects and phenomena studied in physics is immense. From the incredibly short
lifetime of a nucleus to the age of Earth, from the tiny sizes of subnuclear particles to the vast distance to the edges
of the known universe, from the force exerted by a jumping flea to the force between Earth and the Sun, there are
enough factors of 10 to challenge the imagination of even the most experienced scientist. Giving numerical values
for physical quantities and equations for physical principles allows us to understand nature much more deeply than
qualitative descriptions alone. To comprehend these vast ranges, we must also have accepted units in which to
express them. We shall find that even in the potentially mundane discussion of meters, kilograms, and seconds, a
profound simplicity of nature appears: all physical quantities can be expressed as combinations of only seven base
physical units.
We define a physical quantity either by specifying how it is measured or by stating how it is calculated from other
measurements. For example, we might define distance and time by specifying methods for measuring them, such as
using a meter stick and a stopwatch. Then, we could define average speed by stating that it is calculated as the total
distance traveled divided by time of travel.
Measurements of physical quantities are expressed in terms of units, which are standardized values. For example,
Access for free at openstax.org

1.2 • Units and Standards 13
the length of a race, which is a physical quantity, can be expressed in units of meters (for sprinters) or kilometers
(for distance runners). Without standardized units, it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and
compare measured values in a meaningful way (Figure 1.7).
FIGURE 1.7 Distances given in unknown units are maddeningly useless.
Two major systems of units are used in the world: SI units (for the French Système International d’Unités), also
known as the metric system, and English units (also known as the customary or imperial system). English units
were historically used in nations once ruled by the British Empire and are still widely used in the United States.
English units may also be referred to as the foot–pound–second (fps) system, as opposed to the
centimeter–gram–second (cgs) system. You may also encounter the term SAE units, named after the Society of
Automotive Engineers. Products such as fasteners and automotive tools (for example, wrenches) that are measured
in inches rather than metric units are referred to as SAE fasteners or SAE wrenches.
Virtually every other country in the world (except the United States) now uses SI units as the standard. The metric
system is also the standard system agreed on by scientists and mathematicians.
SI Units: Base and Derived Units
In any system of units, the units for some physical quantities must be defined through a measurement process.
These are called the base quantities for that system and their units are the system’s base units. All other physical
quantities can then be expressed as algebraic combinations of the base quantities. Each of these physical quantities
is then known as a derived quantity and each unit is called a derived unit. The choice of base quantities is
somewhat arbitrary, as long as they are independent of each other and all other quantities can be derived from
them. Typically, the goal is to choose physical quantities that can be measured accurately to a high precision as the
base quantities. The reason for this is simple. Since the derived units can be expressed as algebraic combinations of
the base units, they can only be as accurate and precise as the base units from which they are derived.
Based on such considerations, the International Standards Organization recommends using seven base quantities,
which form the International System of Quantities (ISQ). These are the base quantities used to define the SI base
units. Table 1.1 lists these seven ISQ base quantities and the corresponding SI base units.
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Length meter (m)
Mass kilogram (kg)
Time second (s)
Electrical current ampere (A)
TABLE 1.1 ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units