# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 356-360
############################################################

348 Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics
product of a time-independent wave function and a time-modulation factor.
• The Schrӧdinger equation can be applied to many physical situations.
7.4The Quantum Particle in a Box
• Energy states of a quantum particle in a box are found by solving the time-independent Schrӧdinger equation.
• Tosolvethetime-independentSchrӧdingerequationforaparticleinaboxandfindthestationarystatesandallowed
energies, we require that the wave function terminate at the box wall.
• Energy states of a particle in a box are quantized and indexed by principal quantum number.
• Thequantumpicturedifferssignificantlyfromtheclassicalpicturewhenaparticleisinalow-energystateofalow
quantum number.
• In the limit of high quantum numbers, when the quantum particle is in a highly excited state, the quantum
description of a particle in a box coincides with the classical description, in the spirit of Bohr’s correspondence
principle.
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
• The quantum harmonic oscillator is a model built in analogy with the model of a classical harmonic oscillator. It
models the behavior of many physical systems, such as molecular vibrations or wave packets in quantum optics.
• Theallowedenergiesofaquantumoscillatorarediscreteandevenlyspaced.TheenergyspacingisequaltoPlanck’s
energy quantum.
• The ground state energy is larger than zero. This means that, unlike a classical oscillator, a quantum oscillator is
never at rest, even at the bottom of a potential well, and undergoes quantum fluctuations.
• Thestationarystates(statesofdefiniteenergy)havenonzerovaluesalsoinregionsbeyondclassicalturningpoints.
Wheninthegroundstate,aquantumoscillatorismostlikelytobefoundaroundthepositionoftheminimumofthe
potential well, which is the least-likely position for a classical oscillator.
• Forhighquantumnumbers,themotionofaquantumoscillatorbecomesmoresimilartothemotionofaclassical
oscillator, in accordance with Bohr’s correspondence principle.
7.6The Quantum Tunneling of Particles through Potential Barriers
• Aquantumparticlethatisincidentonapotentialbarrierofafinitewidthandheightmaycrossthebarrierandappear
on its other side. This phenomenon is called ‘quantum tunneling.’ It does not have a classical analog.
• Tofindtheprobabilityofquantumtunneling,weassumetheenergyofanincidentparticleandsolvethestationary
Schrӧdingerequationtofindwavefunctionsinsideandoutsidethebarrier.Thetunnelingprobabilityisaratioof
squared amplitudes of the wave past the barrier to the incident wave.
• Thetunnelingprobabilitydependsontheenergyoftheincidentparticlerelativetotheheightofthebarrierandon
thewidthofthebarrier.Itisstronglyaffectedbythewidthofthebarrierinanonlinear,exponentialwaysothata
small change in the barrier width causes a disproportionately large change in the transmission probability.
• Quantum-tunnelingphenomenagovernradioactivenucleardecays.Theyareutilizedinmanymoderntechnologies
such as STM and nano-electronics. STM allows us to see individual atoms on metal surfaces. Electron-tunneling
devices have revolutionized electronics and allow us to build fast electronic devices of miniature sizes.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
3. Whatkindofphysicalquantitydoesawavefunctionof
7.1Wave Functions an electron represent?
1. Whatisthephysicalunitofawavefunction, Ψ(x, t)?
4. What is the physical meaning of a wave function of a
What is the physical unit of the square of this wave
particle?
function?
5. What is the meaning of the expression “expectation
2. Can the magnitude of a wave function
value?” Explain.
(Ψ* (x, t)Ψ(x, t)) be a negative number? Explain.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics 349
is exactly zero. Explain what is wrong with the following
7.2The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle reasoning:“Iftheprobabilityoffindingaquantumparticle
at the midpoint is zero, the particle is never at this point,
6. Iftheformalismofquantummechanicsis‘moreexact’
right?Howdoesitcomethenthattheparticlecancrossthis
thanthatofclassicalmechanics,whydon’tweusequantum
point on its way from the left side to the right side of the
mechanics to describe the motion of a leaping frog?
box?
Explain.
7. CanthedeBrogliewavelengthofaparticle beknown
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
precisely? Can the position of a particle be known
precisely? 17. Is it possible to measure energy of 0.75ℏω for a
quantum harmonic oscillator? Why? Why not? Explain.
8. Canwemeasuretheenergyofafreelocalizedparticle
with complete precision? 18. Explain the connection between Planck’s hypothesis
ofenergyquantaandtheenergiesofthequantumharmonic
9. Canwemeasureboththepositionandmomentumofa oscillator.
particle with complete precision?
19. If a classical harmonic oscillator can be at rest, why
canthequantumharmonicoscillatorneverbeatrest?Does
7.3The Schrӧdinger Equation this violate Bohr’s correspondence principle?
10. What is the difference between a wave function
ψ(x, y, z) andawavefunction Ψ(x, y, z, t) forthesame 20. Use an example of a quantum particle in a box or
a quantum oscillator to explain the physical meaning of
particle?
Bohr’s correspondence principle.
11. If a quantum particle is in a stationary state, does it
21. Can we simultaneously measure position and energy
mean that it does not move?
of a quantum oscillator? Why? Why not?
12. Explain the difference between time-dependent and
-independent Schrӧdinger’s equations.
7.6The Quantum Tunneling of Particles
through Potential Barriers
13. Suppose a wave function is discontinuous at some
point.Canthisfunctionrepresentaquantumstateofsome 22. When an electron and a proton of the same kinetic
physical particle? Why? Why not? energyencounterapotentialbarrierofthesameheightand
width, which one of them will tunnel through the barrier
more easily? Why?
7.4The Quantum Particle in a Box
23. What decreases the tunneling probability most:
14. Using the quantum particle in a box model, describe
doublingthebarrierwidthorhalvingthekineticenergyof
howthe possible energies ofthe particle are related to the
the incident particle?
size of the box.
24. Explain the difference between a box-potential and a
15. Is it possible that when we measure the energy of a
potential of a quantum dot.
quantum particle in a box, the measurement may return a
smaller value than the ground state energy? What is the
highest value of the energy that we can measure for this 25. Can a quantum particle ‘escape’ from an infinite
particle? potential well like that in a box? Why? Why not?
16. Foraquantumparticleinabox,thefirstexcitedstate 26. A tunnel diode and a resonant-tunneling diode both
(Ψ ) haszerovalueatthemidpointpositioninthebox,so utilizethesamephysicsprincipleofquantumtunneling.In
2
what important way are they different?
thattheprobabilitydensityoffindingaparticleatthispoint

350 Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics
PROBLEMS
components?(c)Findtheratiooftheuncertaintiesin(b)to
7.1Wave Functions the mean speed of an atom in each direction.
27. Compute |Ψ(x, t)| 2 for the function
34. If the uncertainty in the y-component of a proton’s
Ψ(x, t)=ψ(x)sinω t, where ω is a real constant.
position is 2.0 pm, find the minimum uncertainty in the
simultaneous measurement of the proton’s y-component
28. Given the complex-valued function
of velocity. What is the minimum uncertainty in the
f(x, y)=(x−iy)/(x+iy), calculate |f(x, y)| 2. simultaneous measurement of the proton’s x-component
of velocity?
29. Which one of the following functions, and why,
qualifiestobeawavefunctionofaparticlethatcanmove 35. Someunstableelementaryparticlehasarestenergyof
along the entire real axis? (a) ψ(x)= Ae−x 2 ; 80.41GeVandanuncertainty inrest energyof2.06GeV.
Estimate the lifetime of this particle.
(b) ψ(x)= Ae−x; (c) ψ(x)= Atanx;
(d) ψ(x)= A(sinx)/x; (e) ψ(x)= Ae−|x|. 36. An atom in a metastable state has a lifetime of 5.2
ms. Find the minimum uncertainty in the measurement of
energy of the excited state.
30. A particle with mass m moving along the x-axis and
its quantum state is represented by the following wave
37. Measurements indicate that an atom remains in an
function:
excitedstateforanaveragetimeof50.0nsbeforemaking
⎧ 0, x<0, a transition to the ground state with the simultaneous
Ψ(x, t)= ⎩ ⎨ Axe−α xe−i E t/ℏ , x≥0, emission of a 2.1-eV photon. (a) Estimate the uncertainty
in the frequency of the photon. (b) What fraction of the
where α=2.0×10 10 m−1. (a) Find the normalization photon’s average frequency is this?
constant. (b) Find the probability that the particle can be
38. Supposeanelectronisconfinedtoaregionoflength
foundontheinterval 0≤ x≤L.(c)Findtheexpectation
0.1 nm (of the order of the size of a hydrogen atom) and
valueofposition.(d)Findtheexpectationvalueofkinetic
its kinetic energy is equal to the ground state energy of
energy.
thehydrogenatominBohr’smodel(13.6eV).(a)Whatis
theminimumuncertaintyofitsmomentum?Whatfraction
31. A wave function of a particle with massmis given by of its momentum is it? (b) What would the uncertainty in
π π kinetic energy of this electron be if its momentum were
⎧Acosαx, − ≤ x≤ + ,
ψ(x)=⎨ 2α 2α equaltoyouranswerinpart(a)?Whatfractionofitskinetic
⎩ 0, otherwise, energy is it?
where α=1.00×10 10 /m. (a) Find the normalization
constant. (b) Find the probability that the particle can be 7.3The Schrӧdinger Equation
foundontheinterval 0≤ x≤0.5×10 −10 m.(c)Findthe 39. Combine Equation 7.17 and Equation 7.18 to
p (e a ) rticle’s F a in v d eragep i o ts sition. a ( v d e ) r F ag in e ditsav k e in ra e g ti e c mome e n n t e u r m gy . show k2= ω c2 2 .
−0.5×10 −10 m≤ x≤ +0.5×10 −10 m.
40. Showthat Ψ(x, t)= Ae
i(kx−ωt)
isavalidsolutionto
7.2The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Schrӧdinger’s time-dependent equation.
32. A velocity measurement of an α-particle has been
41. Show that Ψ(x, t)= Asin(kx−ωt) and
performed with a precision of 0.02 mm/s. What is the
minimum uncertainty in its position? Ψ(x, t)= Acos(kx−ωt) do not obey Schrӧdinger’s
time-dependent equation.
33. A gas of helium atoms at 273 K is in a cubical
containerwith25.0cmonaside.(a)Whatistheminimum 42. Showthatwhen Ψ (x, t) and Ψ (x, t) aresolutions
1 2
uncertainty in momentum components of helium atoms?
to the time-dependent Schrӧdinger equation and A,B are
(b) What is the minimum uncertainty in velocity
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics 351
numbers, then a function Ψ(x, t) that is a superposition uranium nucleus that has a radius of approximately 15.0
fm?
of these functions is also a solution:
Ψ(x, t)= AΨ (x, t)+BΨ (x, t).
1 1
52. To excite an electron in a one-dimensional box from
itsfirstexcitedstatetoitsthirdexcitedstaterequires20.0
43. Aparticlewithmassmisdescribedbythefollowing eV. What is the width of the box?
wave function: ψ(x)= Acoskx+Bsinkx, where A, B,
and k are constants. Assuming that the particle is free, 53. An electron confined to a box of width 0.15 nm by
show that this function is the solution of the stationary infinite potential energy barriers emits a photon when it
Schrӧdinger equation for this particle and find the energy makesatransitionfromthefirstexcitedstatetotheground
that the particle has in this state. state. Find the wavelength of the emitted photon.
44. Find the expectation value of the kinetic energy for 54. Iftheenergyofthefirstexcitedstateoftheelectronin
the particle in the state, Ψ(x, t)= Ae i(kx−ωt). What the box is 25.0 eV, what is the width of the box?
conclusion can you draw from your solution?
55. Supposeanelectronconfinedtoaboxemitsphotons.
Thelongestwavelengththatisregisteredis500.0nm.What
45. Find the expectation value of the square of the
is the width of the box?
momentum squared for the particle in the state,
Ψ(x, t)= Ae
i(kx−ωt).
What conclusion can you draw
56. Hydrogen H molecules are kept at 300.0 K in a
2
from your solution?
cubical container with a side length of 20.0 cm. Assume
that you can treat the molecules as though they were
46. A free proton has a wave function given by moving in a one-dimensional box. (a) Find the ground
Ψ(x, t)= Ae
i (5.02×10 11x−8.00×10 15t). stateenergyofthehydrogenmoleculeinthecontainer.(b)
Assume that the molecule has a thermal energy given by
The coefficient of x is inverse meters (m−1) and the
k
B
T/2 and find the corresponding quantum number n of
the quantum state that would correspond to this thermal
coefficient on t is inverse seconds (s−1). Find its
energy.
momentum and energy.
57. An electron is confined to a box of width 0.25 nm.
(a) Draw an energy-level diagram representing the first
7.4The Quantum Particle in a Box five states of the electron. (b) Calculate the wavelengths
47. Assumethatanelectron inanatomcanbetreated as oftheemittedphotonswhentheelectronmakestransitions
between the fourth and the second excited states, between
if it were confined to a box of width 2.0 Å. What is the
thesecondexcitedstateandthegroundstate,andbetween
groundstateenergyoftheelectron?Compareyourresultto
the third and the second excited states.
thegroundstatekineticenergyofthehydrogenatominthe
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom.
58. Anelectroninaboxisinthegroundstatewithenergy
2.0eV.(a)Findthewidthofthebox.(b)Howmuchenergy
48. Assume that a proton in a nucleus can be treated as
isneededtoexcitetheelectrontoitsfirstexcitedstate?(c)
ifitwereconfinedtoaone-dimensionalboxofwidth10.0
If the electron makes a transition from an excited state to
fm. (a) What are the energies of the proton when it is
thegroundstatewiththesimultaneousemissionof30.0-eV
in the states corresponding to n=1, n=2, and n=3
photon, find the quantum number of the excited state?
? (b) What are the energies of the photons emitted when
the proton makes the transitions from the first and second
excited states to the ground state?
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
59. Show that the two lowest energy states of the simple
49. An electron confined to a box has the ground state
harmonic oscillator, ψ (x) and ψ (x) from Equation
energy of 2.5 eV. What is the width of the box? 0 1
7.57, satisfyEquation 7.55.
50. What is the ground state energy (in eV) of a proton
confinedtoaone-dimensionalboxthesizeoftheuranium 60. If the ground state energy of a simple harmonic
nucleus that has a radius of approximately 15.0 fm? oscillator is 1.25 eV, what is the frequency of its motion?
51. What is the ground state energy (in eV) of an α 61. When a quantum harmonic oscillator makes a
-particleconfinedtoaone-dimensionalboxthesizeofthe