# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 254-261
############################################################

242 5 • Chapter Review
strand sags at an angle of below the
horizontal. Compare this with the tension in the
vertical strand (find their ratio).
60 . Suppose Kevin, a 60.0-kg gymnast, climbs a
rope. (a) What is the tension in the rope if he
climbs at a constant speed? (b) What is the
tension in the rope if he accelerates upward at a
rate of ?
61 . Show that, as explained in the text, a force
exerted on a flexible medium at its center and
perpendicular to its length (such as on the
tightrope wire in Figure 5.26) gives rise to a
tension of magnitude .
62 . Consider Figure 5.28. The driver attempts to get
the car out of the mud by exerting a
perpendicular force of 610.0 N, and the distance
she pushes in the middle of the rope is 1.00 m
while she stands 6.00 m away from the car on
the left and 6.00 m away from the tree on the
right. What is the tension T in the rope, and how
do you find the answer?
63 . A bird has a mass of 26 g and perches in the middle
of a stretched telephone line. (a) Show that the
66 . What force must be applied to a 100.0-kg crate
tension in the line can be calculated using the
on a frictionless plane inclined at to cause
equation . Determine the tension when
an acceleration of up the plane?
(b) and (c) . Assume that each half
of the line is straight.
64 . One end of a 30-m rope is tied to a tree; the
other end is tied to a car stuck in the mud. The
motorist pulls sideways on the midpoint of the
67 . A 2.0-kg block is on a perfectly smooth ramp
rope, displacing it a distance of 2 m. If he exerts
that makes an angle of with the horizontal.
a force of 80 N under these conditions,
(a) What is the block’s acceleration down the
determine the force exerted on the car.
ramp and the force of the ramp on the block? (b)
65 . Consider the baby being weighed in the What force applied upward along and parallel to
following figure. (a) What is the mass of the the ramp would allow the block to move with
infant and basket if a scale reading of 55 N is constant velocity?
observed? (b) What is tension in the cord
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
attaching the baby to the scale? (c) What is
tension in the cord attaching the scale to the 68 . A ball of mass m hangs at rest, suspended by a
ceiling, if the scale has a mass of 0.500 kg? (d) string. (a) Sketch all forces. (b) Draw the free-
Sketch the situation, indicating the system of body diagram for the ball.
interest used to solve each part. The masses of
69 . A car moves along a horizontal road. Draw a
the cords are negligible.
free-body diagram; be sure to include the
friction of the road that opposes the forward
Access for free at openstax.org

5 • Chapter Review 243
motion of the car. Draw a free-body diagram on a coordinate plane
for this situation.
70 . A runner pushes against the track, as shown. (a)
Provide a free-body diagram showing all the
forces on the runner. (Hint: Place all forces at the
center of his body, and include his weight.) (b)
Give a revised diagram showing the
xy-component form.
(credit: modification of work by "Greenwich
Photography"/Flickr)
71 . The traffic light hangs from the cables as shown.
Additional Problems
72 . Two small forces, N and 76 . For a swimmer who has just jumped off a diving
board, assume air resistance is negligible. The
N, are exerted on a rogue
swimmer has a mass of 80.0 kg and jumps off a
asteroid by a pair of space tractors. (a) Find the
board 10.0 m above the water. Three seconds
net force. (b) What are the magnitude and
after entering the water, her downward motion is
direction of the net force? (c) If the mass of the
stopped. What average upward force did the
asteroid is 125 kg, what acceleration does it
water exert on her?
experience (in vector form)? (d) What are the
magnitude and direction of the acceleration? 77 . (a) Find an equation to determine the magnitude
of the net force required to stop a car of mass m,
73 . Two forces of 25 and 45 N act on an object.
given that the initial speed of the car is and
Their directions differ by . The resulting
the stopping distance is x. (b) Find the
acceleration has magnitude of What
magnitude of the net force if the mass of the car
is the mass of the body?
is 1050 kg, the initial speed is 40.0 km/h, and
74 . A force of 1600 N acts parallel to a ramp to push the stopping distance is 25.0 m.
a 300-kg piano into a moving van. The ramp is
78 . A sailboat has a mass of kg and is
inclined at . (a) What is the acceleration of
acted on by a force of N toward the
the piano up the ramp? (b) What is the velocity
east, while the wind acts behind the sails with a
of the piano when it reaches the top if the ramp
force of N in a direction north of
is 4.0 m long and the piano starts from rest?
east. Find the magnitude and direction of the
75 . Draw a free-body diagram of a diver who has
resulting acceleration.
entered the water, moved downward, and is
79 . Find the acceleration of the body of mass 10.0
acted on by an upward force due to the water
kg shown below.
which balances the weight (that is, the diver is
suspended).

244 5 • Chapter Review
83 . A force acts on a car of mass m so that the
speed v of the car increases with position x as
, where k is constant and all quantities
are in SI units. Find the force acting on the car as
a function of position.
84 . A 7.0-N force parallel to an incline is applied to a
1.0-kg crate. The ramp is tilted at and is
frictionless. (a) What is the acceleration of the
crate? (b) If all other conditions are the same
but the ramp has a friction force of 1.9 N, what is
80 . A body of mass 2.0 kg is moving along the x-axis
the acceleration?
with a speed of 3.0 m/s at the instant
represented below. (a) What is the acceleration 85 . Two boxes, A and B, are at rest. Box A is on level
of the body? (b) What is the body’s velocity 10.0 ground, while box B rests on an inclined plane
s later? (c) What is its displacement after 10.0 s? tilted at angle with the horizontal. (a) Write
expressions for the normal force acting on each
block. (b) Compare the two forces; that is, tell
which one is larger or whether they are equal in
magnitude. (c) If the angle of incline is ,
which force is greater?
86 . A mass of 250.0 g is suspended from a spring
hanging vertically. The spring stretches 6.00 cm.
How much will the spring stretch if the
suspended mass is 530.0 g?
87 . As shown below, two identical springs, each with
81 . Force has twice the magnitude of force
the spring constant 20 N/m, support a 15.0-N
Find the direction in which the particle
weight. (a) What is the tension in spring A? (b)
accelerates in this figure.
What is the amount of stretch of spring A from
the rest position?
82 . Shown below is a body of mass 1.0 kg under the
influence of the forces , , and . If the
body accelerates to the left at , what are
and ?
88 . Shown below is a 30.0-kg block resting on a
frictionless ramp inclined at to the horizontal.
The block is held by a spring that is stretched 5.0
cm. What is the force constant of the spring?
Access for free at openstax.org

5 • Chapter Review 245
91 . Two forces are applied to a 5.0-kg object, and it
accelerates at a rate of in the positive
y-direction. If one of the forces acts in the
positive x-direction with magnitude 12.0 N, find
the magnitude of the other force.
92 . The block on the right shown below has more
mass than the block on the left ( ). Draw
free-body diagrams for each block.
89 . In building a house, carpenters use nails from a
large box. The box is suspended from a spring
twice during the day to measure the usage of
nails. At the beginning of the day, the spring
stretches 50 cm. At the end of the day, the
spring stretches 30 cm. What fraction or
percentage of the nails have been used?
90 . A force is applied to a block to move it up a
incline. The incline is frictionless. If
and , what is the magnitude of the
acceleration of the block?
Challenge Problems
93 . If two tugboats pull on a disabled vessel, as shown
here in an overhead view, the disabled vessel will be
pulled along the direction indicated by the result of
the exerted forces. (a) Draw a free-body diagram for
the vessel. Assume no friction or drag forces affect
the vessel. (b) Did you include all forces in the
overhead view in your free-body diagram? Why or
why not?
94 . A 10.0-kg object is initially moving east at 15.0
m/s. Then a force acts on it for 2.00 s, after

246 5 • Chapter Review
which it moves northwest, also at 15.0 m/s. the second player kicks with force 215 N at
What are the magnitude and direction of the east of south. Find the acceleration of the ball in
average force that acted on the object over the and form.
2.00-s interval?
102 . A 10.0-kg mass hangs from a spring that has the
95 . On June 25, 1983, shot-putter Udo Beyer of East spring constant 535 N/m. Find the position of
Germany threw the 7.26-kg shot 22.22 m, which the end of the spring away from its rest position.
at that time was a world record. (a) If the shot (Use .)
was released at a height of 2.20 m with a
103 . A 0.0502-kg pair of fuzzy dice is attached to the
projection angle of , what was its initial
rearview mirror of a car by a short string. The car
velocity? (b) If while in Beyer’s hand the shot
accelerates at constant rate, and the dice hang
was accelerated uniformly over a distance of
at an angle of from the vertical because of
1.20 m, what was the net force on it?
the car’s acceleration. What is the magnitude of
96 . A body of mass m moves in a horizontal the acceleration of the car?
direction such that at time t its position is given
104 . At a circus, a donkey pulls on a sled carrying a
by where a, b, and c are
small clown with a force given by
constants. (a) What is the acceleration of the
. A horse pulls on the same
body? (b) What is the time-dependent force
sled, aiding the hapless donkey, with a force of
acting on the body?
. The mass of the sled is 575 kg.
97 . A body of mass m has initial velocity in the
Using and form for the answer to each
positive x-direction. It is acted on by a constant
problem, find (a) the net force on the sled when
force F for time t until the velocity becomes zero;
the two animals act together, (b) the
the force continues to act on the body until its
acceleration of the sled, and (c) the velocity after
velocity becomes in the same amount of
6.50 s.
time. Write an expression for the total distance
the body travels in terms of the variables 105 . Hanging from the ceiling over a baby bed, well
indicated. out of baby’s reach, is a string with plastic
shapes, as shown here. The string is taut (there
98 . The velocities of a 3.0-kg object at and
is no slack), as shown by the straight segments.
are and Each plastic shape has the same mass m, and
, respectively. If the object is they are equally spaced by a distance d, as
moving at constant acceleration, what is the shown. The angles labeled describe the angle
force acting on it? formed by the end of the string and the ceiling at
each end. The center length of sting is
99 . A 120-kg astronaut is riding in a rocket sled that
horizontal. The remaining two segments each
is sliding along an inclined plane. The sled has a
form an angle with the horizontal, labeled . Let
horizontal component of acceleration of
be the tension in the leftmost section of the
and a downward component of
string, be the tension in the section adjacent
. Calculate the magnitude of the force
to it, and be the tension in the horizontal
on the rider by the sled. (Hint: Remember that
segment. (a) Find an equation for the tension in
gravitational acceleration must be considered.)
each section of the string in terms of the
100 . Two forces are acting on a 5.0-kg object that variables m, g, and . (b) Find the angle in
moves with acceleration in the positive terms of the angle . (c) If , what is the
y-direction. If one of the forces acts in the value of ? (d) Find the distance x between the
positive x-direction and has magnitude of 12 N, endpoints in terms of d and .
what is the magnitude of the other force?
101 . Suppose that you are viewing a soccer game
from a helicopter above the playing field. Two
soccer players simultaneously kick a stationary
soccer ball on the flat field; the soccer ball has
mass 0.420 kg. The first player kicks with force
162 N at north of west. At the same instant,
Access for free at openstax.org

5 • Chapter Review 247
106 . A bullet shot from a rifle has mass of 10.0 g and 108 . In a particle accelerator, a proton has mass
travels to the right at 350 m/s. It strikes a target, and an initial speed of
a large bag of sand, penetrating it a distance of It moves in a straight line, and
34.0 cm. Find the magnitude and direction of the its speed increases to in a
retarding force that slows and stops the bullet. distance of 10.0 cm. Assume that the
acceleration is constant. Find the magnitude of
107 . An object is acted on by three simultaneous
the force exerted on the proton.
forces: ,
109 . A drone is being directed across a frictionless
, and
ice-covered lake. The mass of the drone is 1.50
. The object
kg, and its velocity is . After 10.0 s, the
experiences acceleration of . (a) Find velocity is . If a constant force
the acceleration vector in terms of m. (b) Find in the horizontal direction is causing this change
the mass of the object. (c) If the object begins in motion, find (a) the components of the force
from rest, find its speed after 5.00 s. (d) Find the and (b) the magnitude of the force.
components of the velocity of the object after
5.00 s.

248 5 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org