# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 31-36
############################################################

1.3 • Unit Conversion 19
2. Substitute the given values for distance and time:
3. Convert miles per minute to meters per second by multiplying by the conversion factor that cancels miles and
leave meters, and also by the conversion factor that cancels minutes and leave seconds:
Significance
Check the answer in the following ways:
1. Be sure the units in the unit conversion cancel correctly. If the unit conversion factor was written upside down,
the units do not cancel correctly in the equation. We see the “miles” in the numerator in 0.50 mi/min cancels
the “mile” in the denominator in the first conversion factor. Also, the “min” in the denominator in 0.50 mi/min
cancels the “min” in the numerator in the second conversion factor.
2. Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked us to solve for average speed
in units of meters per second and, after the cancellations, the only units left are a meter (m) in the numerator
and a second (s) in the denominator, so we have indeed obtained these units.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.2
Light travels about 9 Pm in a year. Given that a year is about what is the speed of light in meters per
second?
EXAMPLE 1.3
Converting between Metric Units
The density of iron is under standard conditions. Convert this to kg/m3.
Strategy
We need to convert grams to kilograms and cubic centimeters to cubic meters. The conversion factors we need are
and However, we are dealing with cubic centimeters so we
have to use the second conversion factor three times (that is, we need to cube it). The idea is still to multiply by the
conversion factors in such a way that they cancel the units we want to get rid of and introduce the units we want to
keep.
Solution
Significance
Remember, it’s always important to check the answer.
1. Be sure to cancel the units in the unit conversion correctly. We see that the gram (“g”) in the numerator in 7.86
g/cm3 cancels the “g” in the denominator in the first conversion factor. Also, the three factors of “cm” in the
denominator in 7.86 g/cm3 cancel with the three factors of “cm” in the numerator that we get by cubing the
second conversion factor.
2. Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked for us to convert to kilograms
per cubic meter. After the cancellations just described, we see the only units we have left are “kg” in the
numerator and three factors of “m” in the denominator (that is, one factor of “m” cubed, or “m3”). Therefore,
the units on the final answer are correct.

20 1 • Units and Measurement
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.3
We know from Figure 1.4 that the diameter of Earth is on the order of 107 m, so the order of magnitude of its surface
area is 1014 m2. What is that in square kilometers (that is, km2)? (Try doing this both by converting 107 m to km and
then squaring it and then by converting 1014 m2 directly to square kilometers. You should get the same answer both
ways.)
Unit conversions may not seem very interesting, but not doing them can be costly. One famous example of this
situation was seen with the Mars Climate Orbiter. This probe was launched by NASA on December 11, 1998. On
September 23, 1999, while attempting to guide the probe into its planned orbit around Mars, NASA lost contact with
it. Subsequent investigations showed a piece of software called SM_FORCES (or “small forces”) was recording
thruster performance data in the English units of pound-force-seconds (lbf-s). However, other pieces of software
that used these values for course corrections expected them to be recorded in the SI units of newton-seconds (N-s),
as dictated in the software interface protocols. This error caused the probe to follow a very different trajectory from
what NASA thought it was following, which most likely caused the probe either to burn up in the Martian atmosphere
or to shoot out into space. This failure to pay attention to unit conversions cost hundreds of millions of dollars, not to
mention all the time invested by the scientists and engineers who worked on the project.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.4
Given that 1 lbf (pound-force) is 4.45 N, were the numbers being output by SM_FORCES too big or too small?
1.4 Dimensional Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Find the dimensions of a mathematical expression involving physical quantities.
• Determine whether an equation involving physical quantities is dimensionally consistent.
The dimension of any physical quantity expresses its dependence on the base quantities as a product of symbols
(or powers of symbols) representing the base quantities. Table 1.3 lists the base quantities and the symbols used
for their dimension. For example, a measurement of length is said to have dimension L or L1, a measurement of
mass has dimension M or M1, and a measurement of time has dimension T or T1. Like units, dimensions obey the
rules of algebra. Thus, area is the product of two lengths and so has dimension L2, or length squared. Similarly,
volume is the product of three lengths and has dimension L3, or length cubed. Speed has dimension length over
time, L/T or LT–1. Volumetric mass density has dimension M/L3 or ML–3, or mass over length cubed. In general, the
dimension of any physical quantity can be written as for some powers and g. We
can write the dimensions of a length in this form with and the remaining six powers all set equal to zero:
Any quantity with a dimension that can be written so that all seven powers are zero (that
is, its dimension is ) is called dimensionless (or sometimes “of dimension 1,” because anything
raised to the zero power is one). Physicists often call dimensionless quantities pure numbers.
Base Quantity Symbol for Dimension
Length L
Mass M
Time T
Current I
TABLE 1.3 Base Quantities and Their Dimensions
Access for free at openstax.org

1.4 • Dimensional Analysis 21
Base Quantity Symbol for Dimension
Thermodynamic temperature Θ
Amount of substance N
Luminous intensity J
TABLE 1.3 Base Quantities and Their Dimensions
Physicists often use square brackets around the symbol for a physical quantity to represent the dimensions of that
quantity. For example, if is the radius of a cylinder and is its height, then we write and to indicate
the dimensions of the radius and height are both those of length, or L. Similarly, if we use the symbol for the
surface area of a cylinder and for its volume, then [A] = L2 and [V] = L3. If we use the symbol for the mass of the
cylinder and for the density of the material from which the cylinder is made, then and
The importance of the concept of dimension arises from the fact that any mathematical equation relating physical
quantities must be dimensionally consistent, which means the equation must obey the following rules:
• Every term in an expression must have the same dimensions; it does not make sense to add or subtract
quantities of differing dimension (think of the old saying: “You can’t add apples and oranges”). In particular,
the expressions on each side of the equality in an equation must have the same dimensions.
• The arguments of any of the standard mathematical functions such as trigonometric functions (such as sine
and cosine), logarithms, or exponential functions that appear in the equation must be dimensionless. These
functions require pure numbers as inputs and give pure numbers as outputs.
If either of these rules is violated, an equation is not dimensionally consistent and cannot possibly be a correct
statement of physical law. This simple fact can be used to check for typos or algebra mistakes, to help remember
the various laws of physics, and even to suggest the form that new laws of physics might take. This last use of
dimensions is beyond the scope of this text, but is something you may learn later in your academic career.
EXAMPLE 1.4
Using Dimensions to Remember an Equation
Suppose we need the formula for the area of a circle for some computation. Like many people who learned
geometry too long ago to recall with any certainty, two expressions may pop into our mind when we think of circles:
and One expression is the circumference of a circle of radius r and the other is its area. But which is which?
Strategy
One natural strategy is to look it up, but this could take time to find information from a reputable source. Besides,
even if we think the source is reputable, we shouldn’t trust everything we read. It is nice to have a way to double-
check just by thinking about it. Also, we might be in a situation in which we cannot look things up (such as during a
test). Thus, the strategy is to find the dimensions of both expressions by making use of the fact that dimensions
follow the rules of algebra. If either expression does not have the same dimensions as area, then it cannot possibly
be the correct equation for the area of a circle.
Solution
We know the dimension of area is L2. Now, the dimension of the expression is
since the constant is a pure number and the radius is a length. Therefore, has the dimension of area.
Similarly, the dimension of the expression is
since the constants and are both dimensionless and the radius is a length. We see that has the dimension

22 1 • Units and Measurement
of length, which means it cannot possibly be an area.
We rule out because it is not dimensionally consistent with being an area. We see that is dimensionally
consistent with being an area, so if we have to choose between these two expressions, is the one to choose.
Significance
This may seem like kind of a silly example, but the ideas are very general. As long as we know the dimensions of the
individual physical quantities that appear in an equation, we can check to see whether the equation is dimensionally
consistent. On the other hand, knowing that true equations are dimensionally consistent, we can match expressions
from our imperfect memories to the quantities for which they might be expressions. Doing this will not help us
remember dimensionless factors that appear in the equations (for example, if you had accidentally conflated the
two expressions from the example into then dimensional analysis is no help), but it does help us remember
the correct basic form of equations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.5
Suppose we want the formula for the volume of a sphere. The two expressions commonly mentioned in elementary
discussions of spheres are and One is the volume of a sphere of radius r and the other is its surface
area. Which one is the volume?
EXAMPLE 1.5
Checking Equations for Dimensional Consistency
Consider the physical quantities and with dimensions and
Determine whether each of the following equations is dimensionally consistent: (a) (b)
and (c)
Strategy
By the definition of dimensional consistency, we need to check that each term in a given equation has the same
dimensions as the other terms in that equation and that the arguments of any standard mathematical functions are
dimensionless.
Solution
a. There are no trigonometric, logarithmic, or exponential functions to worry about in this equation, so we need
only look at the dimensions of each term appearing in the equation. There are three terms, one in the left
expression and two in the expression on the right, so we look at each in turn:
All three terms have the same dimension, so this equation is dimensionally consistent.
b. Again, there are no trigonometric, exponential, or logarithmic functions, so we only need to look at the
dimensions of each of the three terms appearing in the equation:
None of the three terms has the same dimension as any other, so this is about as far from being dimensionally
consistent as you can get. The technical term for an equation like this is nonsense.
c. This equation has a trigonometric function in it, so first we should check that the argument of the sine function
is dimensionless:
Access for free at openstax.org

1.5 • Estimates and Fermi Calculations 23
The argument is dimensionless. So far, so good. Now we need to check the dimensions of each of the two
terms (that is, the left expression and the right expression) in the equation:
The two terms have different dimensions—meaning, the equation is not dimensionally consistent. This equation is
another example of “nonsense.”
Significance
If we are trusting people, these types of dimensional checks might seem unnecessary. But, rest assured, any
textbook on a quantitative subject such as physics (including this one) almost certainly contains some equations
with typos. Checking equations routinely by dimensional analysis save us the embarrassment of using an incorrect
equation. Also, checking the dimensions of an equation we obtain through algebraic manipulation is a great way to
make sure we did not make a mistake (or to spot a mistake, if we made one).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.6
Is the equation v = at dimensionally consistent?
One further point that needs to be mentioned is the effect of the operations of calculus on dimensions. We have
seen that dimensions obey the rules of algebra, just like units, but what happens when we take the derivative of one
physical quantity with respect to another or integrate a physical quantity over another? The derivative of a function
is just the slope of the line tangent to its graph and slopes are ratios, so for physical quantities v and t, we have that
the dimension of the derivative of v with respect to t is just the ratio of the dimension of v over that of t:
Similarly, since integrals are just sums of products, the dimension of the integral of v with respect to t is simply the
dimension of v times the dimension of t:
By the same reasoning, analogous rules hold for the units of physical quantities derived from other quantities by
integration or differentiation.
1.5 Estimates and Fermi Calculations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Estimate the values of physical quantities.
On many occasions, physicists, other scientists, and engineers need to make estimates for a particular quantity.
Other terms sometimes used are guesstimates, order-of-magnitude approximations, back-of-the-envelope
calculations, or Fermi calculations. (The physicist Enrico Fermi mentioned earlier was famous for his ability to
estimate various kinds of data with surprising precision.) Will that piece of equipment fit in the back of the car or do
we need to rent a truck? How long will this download take? About how large a current will there be in this circuit
when it is turned on? How many houses could a proposed power plant actually power if it is built? Note that
estimating does not mean guessing a number or a formula at random. Rather, estimation means using prior
experience and sound physical reasoning to arrive at a rough idea of a quantity’s value. Because the process of
determining a reliable approximation usually involves the identification of correct physical principles and a good