# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 311-316
############################################################

6 • Chapter Review 299
on the crate without moving it? (b) If you
continue to exert this force once the crate starts
to slip, what will its acceleration then be? The
coefficient of sliding friction is known to be
0.300 for this situation.
49 . (a) If half of the weight of a small
utility truck is supported by its
two drive wheels, what is the maximum
acceleration it can achieve on dry concrete? (b)
Will a metal cabinet lying on the wooden bed of
45 . A 2.00 kg block (mass 1) and a 4.00 kg block
the truck slip if it accelerates at this rate? (c)
(mass 2) are connected by a light string as
Solve both problems assuming the truck has
shown; the inclination of the ramp is .
four-wheel drive.
Friction is negligible. What is (a) the acceleration
of each block and (b) the tension in the string?
50 . A team of eight dogs pulls a sled with waxed
wood runners on wet snow (mush!). The dogs
have average masses of 19.0 kg, and the loaded
sled with its rider has a mass of 210 kg. (a)
Calculate the acceleration of the dogs starting
from rest if each dog exerts an average force of
185 N backward on the snow. (b) Calculate the
force in the coupling between the dogs and the
sled.
51 . Consider the 65.0-kg ice skater being pushed by
two others shown below. (a) Find the direction
and magnitude of the total force exerted on
her by the others, given that the magnitudes
and are 21.4 N and 10.6 N, respectively. (b)
6.2 Friction
What is her initial acceleration if she is initially
stationary and wearing steel-bladed skates that
46 . (a) When rebuilding an engine, a physics major
point in the direction of (c) What is her
must exert N of force to insert a dry
acceleration assuming she is already moving in
steel piston into a steel cylinder. What is the
the direction of (Remember that friction
normal force between the piston and cylinder?
always acts in the direction opposite that of
(b) What force would they have to exert if the
motion or attempted motion between surfaces
steel parts were oiled?
in contact.)
47 . (a) What is the maximum frictional force in the
knee joint of a person who supports 66.0 kg of
her mass on that knee? (b) During strenuous
exercise, it is possible to exert forces to the
joints that are easily 10 times greater than the
weight being supported. What is the maximum
force of friction under such conditions? The
frictional forces in joints are relatively small in all
circumstances except when the joints
deteriorate, such as from injury or arthritis.
Increased frictional forces can cause further
damage and pain.
48 . Suppose you have a 120-kg wooden crate
resting on a wood floor, with coefficient of static
friction 0.500 between these wood surfaces. (a)
What maximum force can you exert horizontally

300 6 • Chapter Review
54 . Calculate the acceleration opposite to the
motion of a snow boarder going up a
slope, assuming the coefficient of friction for
waxed wood on wet snow. The result of the
preceding problem may be useful, but be careful
to consider the fact that the snow boarder is
going uphill.
55 . A machine at a post office sends packages out a
chute and down a ramp to be loaded into
delivery vehicles. (a) Calculate the acceleration
of a box heading down a slope, assuming
the coefficient of friction for a parcel on waxed
wood is 0.100. (b) Find the angle of the slope
down which this box could move at a constant
velocity. You can neglect air resistance in both
parts.
52 . Show that the acceleration of any object down a
frictionless incline that makes an angle with the 56 . If an object is to rest on an incline without
horizontal is . (Note that this acceleration slipping, then friction must equal the component
is independent of mass.) of the weight of the object parallel to the incline.
This requires greater and greater friction for
steeper slopes. Show that the maximum angle of
an incline above the horizontal for which an
object will not slide down is You
may use the result of the previous problem.
Assume that and that static friction has
reached its maximum value.
53 . Show that the acceleration of any object down
an incline where friction behaves simply (that is,
where is
Note that the acceleration is independent of
mass and reduces to the expression found in the
previous problem when friction becomes
negligibly small
57 . Calculate the maximum acceleration of a car
that is heading down a slope (one that
makes an angle of with the horizontal)
under the following road conditions. You may
assume that the weight of the car is evenly
distributed on all four tires and that the
coefficient of static friction is involved—that is,
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 301
the tires are not allowed to slip during the
acceleration opposite to the motion. (Ignore
rolling.) Calculate for a car: (a) On dry concrete.
(b) On wet concrete. (c) On ice, assuming that
, the same as for shoes on ice.
58 . Calculate the maximum acceleration of a car
that is heading up a slope (one that makes
an angle of with the horizontal) under the
following road conditions. Assume that only half
the weight of the car is supported by the two
drive wheels and that the coefficient of static
friction is involved—that is, the tires are not
allowed to slip during the acceleration. (Ignore
rolling.) (a) On dry concrete. (b) On wet concrete.
(c) On ice, assuming that , the same
as for shoes on ice.
62 . A contestant in a winter sporting event pushes a
59 . Repeat the preceding problem for a car with
45.0-kg block of ice across a frozen lake as shown
four-wheel drive.
below. The coefficient of friction of ice can be found
60 . A freight train consists of two in Table 6.1. (a) Calculate the minimum force F he
engines and 45 cars with average masses of must exert to get the block moving. (b) What is its
(a) What force must each acceleration once it starts to move, if that force is
engine exert backward on the track to accelerate maintained?
the train at a rate of if the
force of friction is , assuming the
engines exert identical forces? This is not a large
frictional force for such a massive system.
Rolling friction for trains is small, and
consequently, trains are very energy-efficient
transportation systems. (b) What is the force in
the coupling between the 37th and 38th cars
(this is the force each exerts on the other),
assuming all cars have the same mass and that
friction is evenly distributed among all of the
63 . The contestant now pulls the block of ice with a rope
cars and engines?
over his shoulder at the same angle above the
61 . Consider the 52.0-kg mountain climber shown horizontal as shown below. The coefficient of friction
below. (a) Find the tension in the rope and the of ice can be found in Table 6.1. Calculate the
force that the mountain climber must exert with minimum force F he must exert to get the block
her feet on the vertical rock face to remain moving. (b) What is its acceleration once it starts to
stationary. Assume that the force is exerted move, if that force is maintained?
parallel to her legs. Also, assume negligible force
exerted by her arms. (b) What is the minimum
coefficient of friction between her shoes and the
cliff?
64 . At a post office, a parcel that is a 20.0-kg box

302 6 • Chapter Review
slides down a ramp inclined at with the
horizontal. The coefficient of kinetic friction
between the box and plane is 0.0300. (a) Find
the acceleration of the box. (b) Find the velocity
of the box as it reaches the end of the plane, if
the length of the plane is 2 m and the box starts
at rest.
6.3 Centripetal Force
65 . (a) A 22.0-kg child is riding a playground merry-
go-round that is rotating at 40.0 rev/min. What
centripetal force is exerted if he is 1.25 m from
its center? (b) What centripetal force is exerted if
the merry-go-round rotates at 3.00 rev/min and
he is 8.00 m from its center? (c) Compare each
71 . If a car takes a banked curve at less than the
force with his weight.
ideal speed, friction is needed to keep it from
66 . Calculate the centripetal force on the end of a sliding toward the inside of the curve (a problem
100-m (radius) wind turbine blade that is on icy mountain roads). (a) Calculate the ideal
rotating at 0.5 rev/s. Assume the mass is 4 kg. speed to take a 100.0 m radius curve banked at
. (b) What is the minimum coefficient of
67 . What is the ideal banking angle for a gentle turn
friction needed for a frightened driver to take the
of 1.20-km radius on a highway with a 105 km/h
same curve at 20.0 km/h?
speed limit (about 65 mi/h), assuming everyone
travels at the limit? 72 . Modern roller coasters have vertical loops like the
one shown here. The radius of curvature is smaller
68 . What is the ideal speed to take a 100.0-m-
at the top than on the sides so that the downward
radius curve banked at a angle?
centripetal acceleration at the top will be greater
69 . (a) What is the radius of a bobsled turn banked than the acceleration due to gravity, keeping the
at and taken at 30.0 m/s, assuming it is passengers pressed firmly into their seats. What is
ideally banked? (b) Calculate the centripetal the speed of the roller coaster at the top of the loop
acceleration. (c) Does this acceleration seem if the radius of curvature there is 15.0 m and the
large to you? downward acceleration of the car is 1.50 g?
70 . Part of riding a bicycle involves leaning at the
correct angle when making a turn, as seen below.
To be stable, the force exerted by the ground
must be on a line going through the center of
gravity. The force on the bicycle wheel can be
resolved into two perpendicular
components—friction parallel to the road (this
must supply the centripetal force) and the vertical
normal force (which must equal the system’s
weight). (a) Show that (as defined as shown) is
related to the speed v and radius of curvature r of
the turn in the same way as for an ideally banked
roadway—that is, (b) Calculate
for a 12.0-m/s turn of radius 30.0 m (as in a
race).
73 . A child of mass 40.0 kg is in a roller coaster car that
travels in a loop of radius 7.00 m. At point A the
speed of the car is 10.0 m/s, and at point B, the
speed is 10.5 m/s. Assume the child is not holding
on and does not wear a seat belt. (a) What is the
force of the car seat on the child at point A? (b) What
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 303
is the force of the car seat on the child at point B? (c) position with a surface area of .
What minimum speed is required to keep the child in
80 . A 60.0-kg and a 90.0-kg skydiver jump from an
his seat at point A?
airplane at an altitude of , both
falling in a headfirst position. Make some
assumption on their frontal areas and calculate
their terminal velocities. How long will it take for
each skydiver to reach the ground (assuming the
time to reach terminal velocity is small)?
Assume all values are accurate to three
significant digits.
81 . A 560-g squirrel with a surface area of
falls from a 5.0-m tree to the ground. Estimate
its terminal velocity. (Use a drag coefficient for a
skydiver falling feet first.) What will be the
velocity of a 56-kg person hitting the ground,
assuming no drag contribution in such a short
distance?
82 . To maintain a constant speed, the force provided
74 . In the simple Bohr model of the ground state of
by a car’s engine must equal the drag force plus
the hydrogen atom, the electron travels in a
the force of friction of the road (the rolling
circular orbit around a fixed proton. The radius of
resistance). (a) What are the drag forces at 70
the orbit is and the speed of
km/h and 100 km/h for a Toyota Camry? (Drag
the electron is The mass of an
area is ) (b) What is the drag force at 70
electron is . What is the force
km/h and 100 km/h for a Hummer H2? (Drag
on the electron?
area is Assume all values are accurate
75 . Railroad tracks follow a circular curve of radius to three significant digits.
500.0 m and are banked at an angle of . For
83 . By what factor does the drag force on a car
trains of what speed are these tracks designed?
increase as it goes from 65 to 110 km/h?
76 . The CERN particle accelerator is circular with a
84 . Calculate the velocity a spherical rain drop
circumference of 26.7 km. (a) What is the
would achieve falling from 5.00 km (a) in the
acceleration of the protons
absence of air drag (b) with air drag. Take the
that move around the
size across of the drop to be 4 mm, the density
accelerator at of the speed of light? (The
to be , and the surface area
speed of light is ) (b) What
to be .
is the force on the protons?
85 . Using Stokes’ law, verify that the units for
77 . A car rounds an unbanked curve of radius 65 m.
viscosity are kilograms per meter per second.
If the coefficient of static friction between the
road and car is 0.70, what is the maximum 86 . Find the terminal velocity of a spherical
speed at which the car can traverse the curve bacterium (diameter ) falling in water.
without slipping? You will first need to note that the drag force is
equal to the weight at terminal velocity. Take the
78 . A banked highway is designed for traffic moving
density of the bacterium to be
at 90.0 km/h. The radius of the curve is 310 m.
.
What is the angle of banking of the highway?
87 . Stokes’ law describes sedimentation of particles
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
in liquids and can be used to measure viscosity.
79 . The terminal velocity of a person falling in air Particles in liquids achieve terminal velocity
depends upon the weight and the area of the quickly. One can measure the time it takes for a
person facing the fluid. Find the terminal velocity particle to fall a certain distance and then use
(in meters per second and kilometers per hour) Stokes’ law to calculate the viscosity of the
of an 80.0-kg skydiver falling in a headfirst liquid. Suppose a steel ball bearing (density