# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 26-31
############################################################

14 1 • Units and Measurement
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Thermodynamic temperature kelvin (K)
Amount of substance mole (mol)
Luminous intensity candela (cd)
TABLE 1.1 ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units
You are probably already familiar with some derived quantities that can be formed from the base quantities in Table
1.1. For example, the geometric concept of area is always calculated as the product of two lengths. Thus, area is a
derived quantity that can be expressed in terms of SI base units using square meters Similarly,
volume is a derived quantity that can be expressed in cubic meters Speed is length per time; so in terms of SI
base units, we could measure it in meters per second (m/s). Volume mass density (or just density) is mass per
volume, which is expressed in terms of SI base units such as kilograms per cubic meter (kg/m3). Angles can also be
thought of as derived quantities because they can be defined as the ratio of the arc length subtended by two radii of
a circle to the radius of the circle. This is how the radian is defined. Depending on your background and interests,
you may be able to come up with other derived quantities, such as the mass flow rate (kg/s) or volume flow rate
(m3/s) of a fluid, electric charge mass flux density and so on. We will see many more examples
throughout this text. For now, the point is that every physical quantity can be derived from the seven base quantities
in Table 1.1, and the units of every physical quantity can be derived from the seven SI base units.
For the most part, we use SI units in this text. Non-SI units are used in a few applications in which they are in very
common use, such as the measurement of temperature in degrees Celsius the measurement of fluid volume in
liters (L), and the measurement of energies of elementary particles in electron-volts (eV). Whenever non-SI units are
discussed, they are tied to SI units through conversions. For example, 1 L is
INTERACTIVE
Check out a comprehensive source of information on SI units (https://openstax.org/l/21SIUnits) at the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty.
Units of Time, Length, and Mass: The Second, Meter, and Kilogram
The initial chapters in this textbook are concerned with mechanics, fluids, and waves. In these subjects all pertinent
physical quantities can be expressed in terms of the base units of length, mass, and time. Therefore, we now turn to
a discussion of these three base units, leaving discussion of the others until they are needed later.
The second
The SI unit for time, the second (abbreviated s), has a long history. For many years it was defined as 1/86,400 of a
mean solar day. More recently, a new standard was adopted to gain greater accuracy and to define the second in
terms of a nonvarying or constant physical phenomenon (because the solar day is getting longer as a result of the
very gradual slowing of Earth’s rotation). Cesium atoms can be made to vibrate in a very steady way, and these
vibrations can be readily observed and counted. In 1967, the second was redefined as the time required for
9,192,631,770 of these vibrations to occur (Figure 1.8). Note that this may seem like more precision than you would
ever need, but it isn’t—GPSs rely on the precision of atomic clocks to be able to give you turn-by-turn directions on
the surface of Earth, far from the satellites broadcasting their location.
Access for free at openstax.org

1.2 • Units and Standards 15
FIGURE 1.8 An atomic clock such as this one uses the vibrations of cesium atoms to keep time to a precision of better than a microsecond
per year. The fundamental unit of time, the second, is based on such clocks. This image looks down from the top of an atomic fountain
nearly 30 feet tall. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
The meter
The SI unit for length is the meter (abbreviated m); its definition has also changed over time to become more
precise. The meter was first defined in 1791 as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the equator to the North Pole.
This measurement was improved in 1889 by redefining the meter to be the distance between two engraved lines on
a platinum–iridium bar now kept near Paris. By 1960, it had become possible to define the meter even more
accurately in terms of the wavelength of light, so it was again redefined as 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of orange light
emitted by krypton atoms. In 1983, the meter was given its current definition (in part for greater accuracy) as the
distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second (Figure 1.9). This change came after knowing the
speed of light to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s.
FIGURE 1.9 The meter is defined to be the distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second in a vacuum. Distance traveled is speed
multiplied by time.
The kilogram
The SI unit for mass is the kilogram (abbreviated kg); From 1795–2018 it was defined to be the mass of a
platinum–iridium cylinder kept with the old meter standard at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures
near Paris. However, this cylinder has lost roughly 50 micrograms since it was created. Because this is the standard,
this has shifted how we defined a kilogram. Therefore, a new definition was adopted in May 2019 based on the
Planck constant and other constants which will never change in value. We will study Planck’s constant in quantum
mechanics, which is an area of physics that describes how the smallest pieces of the universe work. The kilogram is
measured on a Kibble balance (see Figure 1.10). When a weight is placed on a Kibble balance, an electrical current
is produced that is proportional to Planck’s constant. Since Planck’s constant is defined, the exact current
measurements in the balance define the kilogram.

16 1 • Units and Measurement
FIGURE 1.10 Redefining the SI unit of mass. The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology’s Kibble balance is a machine that
balances the weight of a test mass with the resulting electrical current needed for a force to balance it.
Metric Prefixes
SI units are part of the metric system, which is convenient for scientific and engineering calculations because the
units are categorized by factors of 10. Table 1.2 lists the metric prefixes and symbols used to denote various factors
of 10 in SI units. For example, a centimeter is one-hundredth of a meter (in symbols, 1 cm = 10–2 m) and a
kilometer is a thousand meters (1 km = 103 m). Similarly, a megagram is a million grams (1 Mg = 106 g), a
nanosecond is a billionth of a second (1 ns = 10–9 s), and a terameter is a trillion meters (1 Tm = 1012 m).
Prefix Symbol Meaning Prefix Symbol Meaning
yotta- Y 1024 yocto- y 10–24
zetta- Z 1021 zepto- z 10–21
exa- E 1018 atto- a 10–18
peta- P 1015 femto- f 10–15
tera- T 1012 pico- p 10–12
giga- G 109 nano- n 10–9
mega- M 106 micro- 10–6
kilo- k 103 milli- m 10–3
hecto- h 102 centi- c 10–2
deka- da 101 deci- d 10–1
TABLE 1.2 Metric Prefixes for Powers of 10 and Their Symbols
The only rule when using metric prefixes is that you cannot “double them up.” For example, if you have
Access for free at openstax.org

1.2 • Units and Standards 17
measurements in petameters (1 Pm = 1015 m), it is not proper to talk about megagigameters, although
In practice, the only time this becomes a bit confusing is when discussing masses. As we have
seen, the base SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg), but metric prefixes need to be applied to the gram (g), because
we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes. Thus, a thousand kilograms (103 kg) is written as a megagram (1 Mg)
since
Incidentally, 103 kg is also called a metric ton, abbreviated t. This is one of the units outside the SI system
considered acceptable for use with SI units.
As we see in the next section, metric systems have the advantage that conversions of units involve only powers of
10. There are 100 cm in 1 m, 1000 m in 1 km, and so on. In nonmetric systems, such as the English system of units,
the relationships are not as simple—there are 12 in. in 1 ft, 5280 ft in 1 mi, and so on.
Another advantage of metric systems is that the same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of values simply
by scaling it with an appropriate metric prefix. The prefix is chosen by the order of magnitude of physical quantities
commonly found in the task at hand. For example, distances in meters are suitable in construction, whereas
distances in kilometers are appropriate for air travel, and nanometers are convenient in optical design. With the
metric system there is no need to invent new units for particular applications. Instead, we rescale the units with
which we are already familiar.
EXAMPLE 1.1
Using Metric Prefixes
Restate the mass using a metric prefix such that the resulting numerical value is bigger than one but
less than 1000.
Strategy
Since we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes, we first need to restate the mass in grams by replacing the prefix
symbol k with a factor of 103 (see Table 1.2). Then, we should see which two prefixes in Table 1.2 are closest to the
resulting power of 10 when the number is written in scientific notation. We use whichever of these two prefixes
gives us a number between one and 1000.
Solution
Replacing the k in kilogram with a factor of 103, we find that
From Table 1.2, we see that 1016 is between “peta-” (1015) and “exa-” (1018). If we use the “peta-” prefix, then we
find that since Alternatively, if we use the “exa-” prefix we find that
since Because the problem asks for the numerical value
between one and 1000, we use the “peta-” prefix and the answer is 19.3 Pg.
Significance
It is easy to make silly arithmetic errors when switching from one prefix to another, so it is always a good idea to
check that our final answer matches the number we started with. An easy way to do this is to put both numbers in
scientific notation and count powers of 10, including the ones hidden in prefixes. If we did not make a mistake, the
powers of 10 should match up. In this problem, we started with so we have 13 + 3 = 16 powers of
10. Our final answer in scientific notation is Pg, so we have 1 + 15 = 16 powers of 10. So, everything
checks out.
If this mass arose from a calculation, we would also want to check to determine whether a mass this large makes
any sense in the context of the problem. For this, Figure 1.4 might be helpful.

18 1 • Units and Measurement
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.1
Restate using a metric prefix such that the resulting number is bigger than one but less than 1000.
1.3 Unit Conversion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use conversion factors to express the value of a given quantity in different units.
It is often necessary to convert from one unit to another. For example, if you are reading a European cookbook,
some quantities may be expressed in units of liters and you need to convert them to cups. Or perhaps you are
reading walking directions from one location to another and you are interested in how many miles you will be
walking. In this case, you may need to convert units of feet or meters to miles.
Let’s consider a simple example of how to convert units. Suppose we want to convert 80 m to kilometers. The first
thing to do is to list the units you have and the units to which you want to convert. In this case, we have units in
meters and we want to convert to kilometers. Next, we need to determine a conversion factor relating meters to
kilometers. A conversion factor is a ratio that expresses how many of one unit are equal to another unit. For
example, there are 12 in. in 1 ft, 1609 m in 1 mi, 100 cm in 1 m, 60 s in 1 min, and so on. Refer to Appendix B for a
more complete list of conversion factors. In this case, we know that there are 1000 m in 1 km. Now we can set up
our unit conversion. We write the units we have and then multiply them by the conversion factor so the units cancel
out, as shown:
Note that the unwanted meter unit cancels, leaving only the desired kilometer unit. You can use this method to
convert between any type of unit. Now, the conversion of 80 m to kilometers is simply the use of a metric prefix, as
we saw in the preceding section, so we can get the same answer just as easily by noting that
since “kilo-” means 103 (see Table 1.2) and However, using conversion factors is handy when
converting between units that are not metric or when converting between derived units, as the following examples
illustrate.
EXAMPLE 1.2
Converting Nonmetric Units to Metric
The distance from the university to home is 10 mi and it usually takes 20 min to drive this distance. Calculate the
average speed in meters per second (m/s). (Note: Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel.)
Strategy
First we calculate the average speed using the given units, then we can get the average speed into the desired units
by picking the correct conversion factors and multiplying by them. The correct conversion factors are those that
cancel the unwanted units and leave the desired units in their place. In this case, we want to convert miles to
meters, so we need to know the fact that there are 1609 m in 1 mi. We also want to convert minutes to seconds, so
we use the conversion of 60 s in 1 min.
Solution
1. Calculate average speed. Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel. (Take this definition as a
given for now. Average speed and other motion concepts are covered in later chapters.) In equation form,
Access for free at openstax.org