# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 63-70
############################################################

2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 51
FIGURE 2.11 When we use the parallelogram rule four times, we obtain the resultant vector , which is the green
vector connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville.
Drawing the resultant vector of many vectors can be generalized by using the following tail-to-head geometric
construction. Suppose we want to draw the resultant vector of four vectors , , , and (Figure 2.12(a)). We
select any one of the vectors as the first vector and make a parallel translation of a second vector to a position
where the origin (“tail”) of the second vector coincides with the end (“head”) of the first vector. Then, we select a
third vector and make a parallel translation of the third vector to a position where the origin of the third vector
coincides with the end of the second vector. We repeat this procedure until all the vectors are in a head-to-tail
arrangement like the one shown in Figure 2.12. We draw the resultant vector by connecting the origin (“tail”) of
the first vector with the end (“head”) of the last vector. The end of the resultant vector is at the end of the last vector.
Because the addition of vectors is associative and commutative, we obtain the same resultant vector regardless of
which vector we choose to be first, second, third, or fourth in this construction.
FIGURE 2.12 Tail-to-head method for drawing the resultant vector . (a) Four vectors of different magnitudes and
directions. (b) Vectors in (a) are translated to new positions where the origin (“tail”) of one vector is at the end (“head”) of another vector.
The resultant vector is drawn from the origin (“tail”) of the first vector to the end (“head”) of the last vector in this arrangement.

52 2 • Vectors
EXAMPLE 2.2
Geometric Construction of the Resultant
The three displacement vectors , , and in Figure 2.13 are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.0, B = 7.0, and
C = 8.0, respectively, and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction , , and
. The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Choose a convenient scale and use a ruler and a
protractor to find the following vector sums: (a) , (b) (c) .
FIGURE 2.13 Vectors used in Example 2.2 and in the Check Your Understanding feature that follows.
Strategy
In geometric construction, to find a vector means to find its magnitude and its direction angle with the horizontal
direction. The strategy is to draw to scale the vectors that appear on the right-hand side of the equation and
construct the resultant vector. Then, use a ruler and a protractor to read the magnitude of the resultant and the
direction angle. For parts (a) and (b) we use the parallelogram rule. For (c) we use the tail-to-head method.
Solution
For parts (a) and (b), we attach the origin of vector to the origin of vector , as shown in Figure 2.14, and
construct a parallelogram. The shorter diagonal of this parallelogram is the sum . The longer of the diagonals
is the difference . We use a ruler to measure the lengths of the diagonals, and a protractor to measure the
angles with the horizontal. For the resultant , we obtain R = 5.8 cm and . For the difference , we obtain D
= 16.2 cm and , which are shown in Figure 2.14.
FIGURE 2.14 Using the parallelogram rule to solve (a) (finding the resultant, red) and (b) (finding the difference, blue).
For (c), we can start with vector and draw the remaining vectors tail-to-head as shown in Figure 2.15. In vector
addition, the order in which we draw the vectors is unimportant, but drawing the vectors to scale is very important.
Access for free at openstax.org

2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 53
Next, we draw vector from the origin of the first vector to the end of the last vector and place the arrowhead at the
end of . We use a ruler to measure the length of , and find that its magnitude is
S = 36.9 cm. We use a protractor and find that its direction angle is . This solution is shown in Figure
2.15.
FIGURE 2.15 Using the tail-to-head method to solve (c) (finding vector , green).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.3
Using the three displacement vectors , , and in Figure 2.13, choose a convenient scale, and use a ruler and a
protractor to find vector given by the vector equation .
INTERACTIVE
Observe the addition of vectors in a plane by visiting this vector calculator (https://openstax.org/l/21compveccalc),
and by engaging the Phet simulation below.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21addvectors)
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe vectors in two and three dimensions in terms of their components, using unit vectors along the
axes.
• Distinguish between the vector components of a vector and the scalar components of a vector.
• Explain how the magnitude of a vector is defined in terms of the components of a vector.
• Identify the direction angle of a vector in a plane.
• Explain the connection between polar coordinates and Cartesian coordinates in a plane.
Vectors are usually described in terms of their components in a coordinate system. Even in everyday life we
naturally invoke the concept of vector components in a rectangular coordinate system. For example, if you ask
someone for directions to a particular location, you will more likely be told to go 40 km east and 30 km north than
50 km in the direction north of east.

54 2 • Vectors
In a rectangular (Cartesian) xy-coordinate system in a plane, a point in a plane is described by a pair of coordinates
(x, y). In a similar fashion, a vector in a plane is described by a pair of its vector coordinates. The x-coordinate of
vector is called its x-component and the y-coordinate of vector is called its y-component. The vector
x-component is a vector denoted by . The vector y-component is a vector denoted by . In the Cartesian
system, the x and y vector components of a vector are the orthogonal projections, as illustrated in Figure 2.16, of
this vector onto the x- and y-axes, respectively. In this way, following the parallelogram rule for vector addition,
each vector on a Cartesian plane can be expressed as the vector sum of its vector components:
2.10
As illustrated in Figure 2.16, vector is the diagonal of the rectangle where the x-component is the side parallel
to the x-axis and the y-component is the side parallel to the y-axis. Vector component is orthogonal to vector
component .
FIGURE 2.16 Vector in a plane in the Cartesian coordinate system is the vector sum of its vector x- and y-components. The x-vector
component is the orthogonal projection of vector onto the x-axis. The y-vector component is the orthogonal projection of vector
onto the y-axis. The numbers and that multiply the unit vectors are the scalar components of the vector.
It is customary to denote the positive direction on the x-axis by the unit vector and the positive direction on the
y-axis by the unit vector . Unit vectors of the axes, and , define two orthogonal directions in the plane. As
shown in Figure 2.16, the x- and y- components of a vector can now be written in terms of the unit vectors of the
axes:
2.11
The vectors and defined by Equation 2.11 are the vector components of vector . The numbers and
that define the vector components in Equation 2.11 are the scalar components of vector . Combining Equation
2.10 with Equation 2.11, we obtain the component form of a vector:
2.12
If we know the coordinates of the origin point of a vector (where b stands for “beginning”) and the
coordinates of the end point of a vector (where e stands for “end”), we can obtain the scalar components
of a vector simply by subtracting the origin point coordinates from the end point coordinates:
2.13
Access for free at openstax.org

2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 55
EXAMPLE 2.3
Displacement of a Mouse Pointer
A mouse pointer on the display monitor of a computer at its initial position is at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) with respect
to the lower left-side corner. If you move the pointer to an icon located at point (2.0 cm, 4.5 cm), what is the
displacement vector of the pointer?
Strategy
The origin of the xy-coordinate system is the lower left-side corner of the computer monitor. Therefore, the unit
vector on the x-axis points horizontally to the right and the unit vector on the y-axis points vertically upward. The
origin of the displacement vector is located at point b(6.0, 1.6) and the end of the displacement vector is located at
point e(2.0, 4.5). Substitute the coordinates of these points into Equation 2.13 to find the scalar components
and of the displacement vector . Finally, substitute the coordinates into Equation 2.12 to write the
displacement vector in the vector component form.
Solution
We identify , , , and , where the physical unit is 1 cm. The scalar x- and
y-components of the displacement vector are
The vector component form of the displacement vector is
2.14
This solution is shown in Figure 2.17.
FIGURE 2.17 The graph of the displacement vector. The vector points from the origin point at b to the end point at e.
Significance
Notice that the physical unit—here, 1 cm—can be placed either with each component immediately before the unit
vector or globally for both components, as in Equation 2.14. Often, the latter way is more convenient because it is
simpler.
The vector x-component of the displacement vector has the magnitude
because the magnitude of the unit vector is . Notice, too, that the direction of the
x-component is , which is antiparallel to the direction of the +x-axis; hence, the x-component vector points to

56 2 • Vectors
the left, as shown in Figure 2.17. The scalar x-component of vector is .
Similarly, the vector y-component of the displacement vector has magnitude
because the magnitude of the unit vector is . The direction of the y-component is , which is parallel to the
direction of the +y-axis. Therefore, the y-component vector points up, as seen in Figure 2.17. The scalar
y-component of vector is . The displacement vector is the resultant of its two vector components.
The vector component form of the displacement vector Equation 2.14 tells us that the mouse pointer has been
moved on the monitor 4.0 cm to the left and 2.9 cm upward from its initial position.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.4
A blue fly lands on a sheet of graph paper at a point located 10.0 cm to the right of its left edge and 8.0 cm above its
bottom edge and walks slowly to a point located 5.0 cm from the left edge and 5.0 cm from the bottom edge.
Choose the rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the lower left-side corner of the paper and find the
displacement vector of the fly. Illustrate your solution by graphing.
When we know the scalar components and of a vector , we can find its magnitude A and its direction angle
. The direction angle—or direction, for short—is the angle the vector forms with the positive direction on the
x-axis. The angle is measured in the counterclockwise direction from the +x-axis to the vector (Figure 2.18).
Because the lengths A, , and form a right triangle, they are related by the Pythagorean theorem:
2.15
This equation works even if the scalar components of a vector are negative. The direction angle of a vector is
defined via the tangent function of angle in the triangle shown in Figure 2.18:
2.16
FIGURE 2.18 When the vector lies either in the first quadrant or in the fourth quadrant, where component is positive (Figure 2.19), the
direction angle in Equation 2.16) is identical to the angle .
When the vector lies either in the first quadrant or in the fourth quadrant, where component is positive (Figure
2.19), the angle in Equation 2.16 is identical to the direction angle . For vectors in the fourth quadrant, angle
is negative, which means that for these vectors, direction angle is measured clockwise from the positive x-axis.
Similarly, for vectors in the second quadrant, angle is negative. When the vector lies in either the second or third
Access for free at openstax.org

2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 57
quadrant, where component is negative, the direction angle is (Figure 2.19).
FIGURE 2.19 Scalar components of a vector may be positive or negative. Vectors in the first quadrant (I) have both scalar components
positive and vectors in the third quadrant have both scalar components negative. For vectors in quadrants II and III, the direction angle of a
vector is .
EXAMPLE 2.4
Magnitude and Direction of the Displacement Vector
You move a mouse pointer on the display monitor from its initial position at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) to an icon located
at point (2.0 cm, 4.5 cm). What are the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector of the pointer?
Strategy
In Example 2.3, we found the displacement vector of the mouse pointer (see Equation 2.14). We identify its scalar
components and and substitute into Equation 2.15 and Equation 2.16 to find the
magnitude D and direction , respectively.
Solution
The magnitude of vector is
The direction angle is
Vector lies in the second quadrant, so its direction angle is
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.5
If the displacement vector of a blue fly walking on a sheet of graph paper is , find its
magnitude and direction.