# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 611-617
############################################################

CHAPTER 13
Gravitation
FIGURE 13.1 Our visible Universe contains billions of galaxies, whose very existence is due to the force of gravity. Gravity is ultimately
responsible for the energy output of all stars—initiating thermonuclear reactions in stars, allowing the Sun to heat Earth, and making
galaxies visible from unfathomable distances. Most of the dots you see in this image are not stars, but galaxies. (credit: modification of
work by NASA/ESA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
13.6 Tidal Forces
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity
INTRODUCTION In this chapter, we study the nature of the gravitational force for objects as small as ourselves and
for systems as massive as entire galaxies. We show how the gravitational force affects objects on Earth and the
motion of the Universe itself. Gravity is the first force to be postulated as an action-at-a-distance force, that is,
objects exert a gravitational force on one another without physical contact and that force falls to zero only at an
infinite distance. Earth exerts a gravitational force on you, but so do our Sun, the Milky Way galaxy, and the billions of
galaxies, like those shown above, which are so distant that we cannot see them with the naked eye.
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List the significant milestones in the history of gravitation
• Calculate the gravitational force between two point masses
• Estimate the gravitational force between collections of mass
We first review the history of the study of gravitation, with emphasis on those phenomena that for thousands of

600 13 • Gravitation
years have inspired philosophers and scientists to search for an explanation. Then we examine the simplest form of
Newton’s law of universal gravitation and how to apply it.
The History of Gravitation
The earliest philosophers wondered why objects naturally tend to fall toward the ground. Aristotle (384–322 BCE)
believed that it was the nature of rocks to seek Earth and the nature of fire to seek the Heavens. Brahmagupta
(598~665 CE) postulated that Earth was a sphere and that objects possessed a natural affinity for it, falling toward
the center from wherever they were located.
The motions of the Sun, our Moon, and the planets have been studied for thousands of years as well. These motions
were described with amazing accuracy by Ptolemy (90–168 CE), whose method of epicycles described the paths of
the planets as circles within circles. However, there is little evidence that anyone connected the motion of
astronomical bodies with the motion of objects falling to Earth—until the seventeenth century.
The idea of heliocentrism, in which the Sun is at the center of the solar system, dates at least as far back as
Aristarchus of Samos in the third century BCE, but attracted little attention, and Ptolemy’s geocentric (Earth-
centered) model held sway in Europe until the sixteenth century. Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) is generally
credited as being the first to produce a mathematical model of a heliocentric system and to challenge Ptolemy’s
geocentric system. This idea was supported by the incredibly precise naked-eye measurements of planetary
motions by Tycho Brahe and their analysis by Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei. Kepler showed that the motion of
each planet is an ellipse (the first of his three laws, discussed in Kepler’s Laws of Planetary Motion), and Robert
Hooke (the same Hooke who formulated Hooke’s law for springs) intuitively suggested that these motions are due to
the planets being attracted to the Sun. However, it was Isaac Newton who connected the acceleration of objects
near Earth’s surface with the centripetal acceleration of the Moon in its orbit about Earth.
Other prominent scientists and mathematicians of the time, particularly those outside of England, were reluctant to
accept Newton's principles. It took the work of another prominent philosopher, writer, and scientist, Émilie du
Châtelet, to establish the Newtonian gravitation as the accurate and overarching law. Du Châtelet, who had earlier
laid the foundation for the understanding of conservation of energy as well as the principle that light had no mass,
translated and augmented Newton's key work. She also utilized calculus to explain gravity, which helped lead to its
acceptance.
Finally, in Einstein’s Theory of Gravity, we look at the theory of general relativity proposed by Albert Einstein in
1916. His theory comes from a vastly different perspective, in which gravity is a manifestation of mass warping
space and time. The consequences of his theory gave rise to many remarkable predictions, essentially all of which
have been confirmed over the many decades following the publication of the theory (including the 2015
measurement of gravitational waves from the merger of two black holes).
Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
Newton noted that objects at Earth’s surface (hence at a distance of from the center of Earth) have an
acceleration of g, but the Moon, at a distance of about , has a centripetal acceleration about times
smaller than g. He could explain this by postulating that a force exists between any two objects, whose magnitude is
given by the product of the two masses divided by the square of the distance between them. We now know that this
inverse square law is ubiquitous in nature, a function of geometry for point sources. The strength of any source at a
distance r is spread over the surface of a sphere centered about the mass. The surface area of that sphere is
proportional to . In later chapters, we see this same form in the electromagnetic force.
NEWTON’S LAW OF GRAVITATION
Newton’s law of gravitation can be expressed as
13.1
where is the force on object 1 exerted by object 2 and is a unit vector that points from object 1 toward
Access for free at openstax.org

13.1 • Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation 601
object 2.
As shown in Figure 13.2, the vector points from object 1 toward object 2, and hence represents an attractive
force between the objects. The equal but opposite force is the force on object 2 exerted by object 1.
FIGURE 13.2 Gravitational force acts along a line joining the centers of mass of two objects.
These equal but opposite forces reflect Newton’s third law, which we discussed earlier. Note that strictly speaking,
Equation 13.1 applies to point masses—all the mass is located at one point. But it applies equally to any spherically
symmetric objects, where r is the distance between the centers of mass of those objects. In many cases, it works
reasonably well for nonsymmetrical objects, if their separation is large compared to their size, and we take r to be
the distance between the center of mass of each body.
The Cavendish Experiment
A century after Newton published his law of universal gravitation, Henry Cavendish determined the proportionality
constant G by performing a painstaking experiment. He constructed a device similar to that shown in Figure 13.3, in
which small masses are suspended from a wire. Once in equilibrium, two fixed, larger masses are placed
symmetrically near the smaller ones. The gravitational attraction creates a torsion (twisting) in the supporting wire
that can be measured.
The constant G is called the universal gravitational constant and Cavendish determined it to be
. The word ‘universal’ indicates that scientists think that this constant applies to
masses of any composition and that it is the same throughout the Universe. The value of G is an incredibly small
number, showing that the force of gravity is very weak. The attraction between masses as small as our bodies, or
even objects the size of skyscrapers, is incredibly small. For example, two 1.0-kg masses located 1.0 meter apart
exert a force of on each other. This is the weight of a typical grain of pollen.

602 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.3 Cavendish used an apparatus similar to this to measure the gravitational attraction between two spheres (m) suspended from
a wire and two stationary spheres (M). This is a common experiment performed in undergraduate laboratories, but it is quite challenging.
Passing trucks outside the laboratory can create vibrations that overwhelm the gravitational forces.
Although gravity is the weakest of the four fundamental forces of nature, its attractive nature is what holds us to
Earth, causes the planets to orbit the Sun and the Sun to orbit our galaxy, and binds galaxies into clusters, ranging
from a few to millions. Gravity is the force that forms the Universe.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Newton’s Law of Gravitation
To determine the motion caused by the gravitational force, follow these steps:
1. Identify the two masses, one or both, for which you wish to find the gravitational force.
2. Draw a free-body diagram, sketching the force acting on each mass and indicating the distance between their
centers of mass.
3. Apply Newton’s second law of motion to each mass to determine how it will move.
EXAMPLE 13.1
A Collision in Orbit
Consider two nearly spherical Soyuz payload vehicles, in orbit about Earth, each with mass 9000 kg and diameter
4.0 m. They are initially at rest relative to each other, 10.0 m from center to center. (Both orbit Earth at the same
speed and interact nearly the same as if they were isolated in deep space.) Determine the gravitational force
between them and their initial acceleration toward each other (parallel to their orbital motion). Estimate how long it
takes for them to drift together, and how fast they are moving upon impact.
Strategy
We use Newton’s law of gravitation to determine the force between them and then use Newton’s second law to find
the acceleration of each. For the estimate, we find the final acceleration as well and assume the acceleration is
constant at its average value, and we use the constant-acceleration equations from Motion along a Straight Line to
find the time and speed of the collision.
Access for free at openstax.org

13.1 • Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation 603
Solution
The magnitude of the force is
The initial acceleration of each payload is
The vehicles are 4.0 m in diameter, so the vehicles move from 10.0 m to 4.0 m apart, or a distance of 3.0 m each. A
similar calculation to that above, for when the vehicles are 4.0 m apart, yields an acceleration of ,
and the average of these two values is . If we assume a constant acceleration of this value and
they start from rest, then the vehicles collide with speed given by
so
We use to find or about 4.6 hours.
Significance
These calculations—including the initial force—are only estimates, as the vehicles are probably not spherically
symmetrical. But you can see that the force is incredibly small. Astronauts must tether themselves when doing a
spacewalk, as in Figure 13.4, because the gravitational attraction cannot save them from even the smallest push
away.
FIGURE 13.4 This photo shows Ed White tethered to the Gemini IV capsule during a spacewalk. (credit: NASA)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.1
What happens to force and acceleration as the vehicles fall together? What will our estimate of the velocity at a
collision higher or lower than the speed actually be? And finally, what would happen if the masses were not

604 13 • Gravitation
identical? Would the force on each be the same or different? How about their accelerations?
The effect of gravity between two objects with masses on the order of these space vehicles is indeed small. Yet, the
effect of gravity on you from Earth is significant enough that a fall into Earth of only a few feet can be dangerous. We
examine the force of gravity near Earth’s surface in the next section.
EXAMPLE 13.2
Attraction between Galaxies
Find the acceleration of our galaxy, the Milky Way, due to the nearest comparably sized galaxy, the Andromeda
galaxy (Figure 13.5). The approximate mass of each galaxy is 800 × 109 solar masses (a solar mass is the mass of
our Sun), and they are separated by 2.5 million light-years. (Note that the mass of Andromeda is not so well known
but is believed to be slightly larger than our galaxy.) Each galaxy has a diameter of roughly 100,000 light-years
.
FIGURE 13.5 Galaxies interact gravitationally over immense distances. The Andromeda galaxy is the nearest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way,
and they will eventually collide. (credit: Boris Štromar)
Strategy
As in the preceding example, we use Newton’s law of gravitation to determine the force between them and then use
Newton’s second law to find the acceleration of the Milky Way. We can consider the galaxies to be point masses,
since their sizes are about 25 times smaller than their separation. The mass of the Sun (see Appendix D) is
and a light-year is the distance light travels in one year, .
Solution
The magnitude of the force is
The acceleration of the Milky Way is
Access for free at openstax.org