# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 281-288
############################################################

6.2 • Friction 269
EXAMPLE 6.10
Static and Kinetic Friction
A 20.0-kg crate is at rest on a floor as shown in Figure 6.13. The coefficient of static friction between the crate and
floor is 0.700 and the coefficient of kinetic friction is 0.600. A horizontal force is applied to the crate. Find the
force of friction if (a) (b) (c) and (d)
FIGURE 6.13 (a) A crate on a horizontal surface is pushed with a force (b) The forces on the crate. Here, may represent either the static
or the kinetic frictional force.
Strategy
The free-body diagram of the crate is shown in Figure 6.13(b). We apply Newton’s second law in the horizontal and
vertical directions, including the friction force in opposition to the direction of motion of the box.
Solution
Newton’s second law GIVES
Here we are using the symbol f to represent the frictional force since we have not yet determined whether the crate
is subject to station friction or kinetic friction. We do this whenever we are unsure what type of friction is acting.
Now the weight of the crate is
which is also equal to N. The maximum force of static friction is therefore As long as is
less than 137 N, the force of static friction keeps the crate stationary and Thus, (a) (b)
and (c)
(d) If the applied force is greater than the maximum force of static friction (137 N), so the crate can no
longer remain at rest. Once the crate is in motion, kinetic friction acts. Then
and the acceleration is
Significance
This example illustrates how we consider friction in a dynamics problem. Notice that static friction has a value that

270 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
matches the applied force, until we reach the maximum value of static friction. Also, no motion can occur until the
applied force equals the force of static friction, but the force of kinetic friction will then become smaller.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.7
A block of mass 1.0 kg rests on a horizontal surface. The frictional coefficients for the block and surface are
and (a) What is the minimum horizontal force required to move the block? (b) What is the
block’s acceleration when this force is applied?
Friction and the Inclined Plane
One situation where friction plays an obvious role is that of an object on a slope. It might be a crate being pushed up
a ramp to a loading dock or a skateboarder coasting down a mountain, but the basic physics is the same. We usually
generalize the sloping surface and call it an inclined plane but then pretend that the surface is flat. Let’s look at an
example of analyzing motion on an inclined plane with friction.
EXAMPLE 6.11
Downhill Skier
A skier with a mass of 62 kg is sliding down a snowy slope at a constant acceleration. Find the coefficient of kinetic
friction for the skier if friction is known to be 45.0 N.
Strategy
The magnitude of kinetic friction is given as 45.0 N. Kinetic friction is related to the normal force by ;
thus, we can find the coefficient of kinetic friction if we can find the normal force on the skier. The normal force is
always perpendicular to the surface, and since there is no motion perpendicular to the surface, the normal force
should equal the component of the skier’s weight perpendicular to the slope. (See Figure 6.14, which repeats a
figure from the chapter on Newton’s laws of motion.)
FIGURE 6.14 The motion of the skier and friction are parallel to the slope, so it is most convenient to project all forces onto a coordinate
system where one axis is parallel to the slope and the other is perpendicular (axes shown to left of skier). The normal force is
perpendicular to the slope, and friction is parallel to the slope, but the skier’s weight has components along both axes, namely and
The normal force is equal in magnitude to so there is no motion perpendicular to the slope.
We have
Access for free at openstax.org

6.2 • Friction 271
Substituting this into our expression for kinetic friction, we obtain
which can now be solved for the coefficient of kinetic friction
Solution
Solving for gives
Substituting known values on the right-hand side of the equation,
Significance
This result is a little smaller than the coefficient listed in Table 6.1 for waxed wood on snow, but it is still reasonable
since values of the coefficients of friction can vary greatly. In situations like this, where an object of mass m slides
down a slope that makes an angle with the horizontal, friction is given by All objects slide down
a slope with constant acceleration under these circumstances.
We have discussed that when an object rests on a horizontal surface, the normal force supporting it is equal in
magnitude to its weight. Furthermore, simple friction is always proportional to the normal force. When an object is
not on a horizontal surface, as with the inclined plane, we must find the force acting on the object that is directed
perpendicular to the surface; it is a component of the weight.
We now derive a useful relationship for calculating coefficient of friction on an inclined plane. Notice that the result
applies only for situations in which the object slides at constant speed down the ramp.
An object slides down an inclined plane at a constant velocity if the net force on the object is zero. We can use this
fact to measure the coefficient of kinetic friction between two objects. As shown in Example 6.11, the kinetic friction
on a slope is . The component of the weight down the slope is equal to (see the free-body
diagram in Figure 6.14). These forces act in opposite directions, so when they have equal magnitude, the
acceleration is zero. Writing these out,
Solving for we find that
Put a coin on a book and tilt it until the coin slides at a constant velocity down the book. You might need to tap the
book lightly to get the coin to move. Measure the angle of tilt relative to the horizontal and find Note that the
coin does not start to slide at all until an angle greater than is attained, since the coefficient of static friction is
larger than the coefficient of kinetic friction. Think about how this may affect the value for and its uncertainty.
Atomic-Scale Explanations of Friction
The simpler aspects of friction dealt with so far are its macroscopic (large-scale) characteristics. Great strides have
been made in the atomic-scale explanation of friction during the past several decades. Researchers are finding that
the atomic nature of friction seems to have several fundamental characteristics. These characteristics not only
explain some of the simpler aspects of friction—they also hold the potential for the development of nearly friction-
free environments that could save hundreds of billions of dollars in energy which is currently being converted
(unnecessarily) into heat.
Figure 6.15 illustrates one macroscopic characteristic of friction that is explained by microscopic (small-scale)

272 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
research. The equations for kinetic and maximum static friction depend on the normal force and the materials in
contact, but not on the amount of area in contact, a somewhat counterintuitive notion. When two rough surfaces are
in contact, the actual contact area is a tiny fraction of the total area because only high spots touch. When a greater
normal force is exerted, the actual contact area increases, and we find that the friction is proportional to this area.
FIGURE 6.15 Two rough surfaces in contact have a much smaller area of actual contact than their total area. When the normal force is
larger as a result of a larger applied force, the area of actual contact increases, as does friction.
However, the atomic-scale view promises to explain far more than the simpler features of friction. The mechanism
for how heat is generated is now being determined. In other words, why do surfaces get warmer when rubbed?
Essentially, atoms are linked with one another to form lattices. When surfaces rub, the surface atoms adhere and
cause atomic lattices to vibrate—essentially creating sound waves that penetrate the material. The sound waves
diminish with distance, and their energy is converted into heat. Chemical reactions that are related to frictional wear
can also occur between atoms and molecules on the surfaces. Figure 6.16 shows how the tip of a probe drawn
across another material is deformed by atomic-scale friction. The force needed to drag the tip can be measured and
is found to be related to shear stress, which is discussed in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity. The variation in shear
stress is remarkable (more than a factor of ) and difficult to predict theoretically, but shear stress is yielding a
fundamental understanding of a large-scale phenomenon known since ancient times—friction.
FIGURE 6.16 The tip of a probe is deformed sideways by frictional force as the probe is dragged across a surface. Measurements of how the
force varies for different materials are yielding fundamental insights into the atomic nature of friction.
INTERACTIVE
Engaging the simulation below, describe a model for friction on a molecular level. Describe matter in terms of
molecular motion. The description should include diagrams to support the description; how the temperature affects
the image; what are the differences and similarities between solid, liquid, and gas particle motion; and how the size
and speed of gas molecules relate to everyday objects.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21friction)
Access for free at openstax.org

6.2 • Friction 273
EXAMPLE 6.12
Sliding Blocks
The two blocks of Figure 6.17 are attached to each other by a massless string that is wrapped around a frictionless
pulley. When the bottom 4.00-kg block is pulled to the left by the constant force the top 2.00-kg block slides
across it to the right. Find the magnitude of the force necessary to move the blocks at constant speed. Assume that
the coefficient of kinetic friction between all surfaces is 0.400.
FIGURE 6.17 (a) Each block moves at constant velocity. (b) Free-body diagrams for the blocks.
Strategy
We analyze the motions of the two blocks separately. The top block is subjected to a contact force exerted by the
bottom block. The components of this force are the normal force and the frictional force Other
forces on the top block are the tension in the string and the weight of the top block itself, 19.6 N. The bottom
block is subjected to contact forces due to the top block and due to the floor. The first contact force has components
and which are simply reaction forces to the contact forces that the bottom block exerts on the top
block. The components of the contact force of the floor are and Other forces on this block are the
tension and the weight –39.2 N.
Solution
Since the top block is moving horizontally to the right at constant velocity, its acceleration is zero in both the
horizontal and the vertical directions. From Newton’s second law,
Solving for the two unknowns, we obtain and The bottom block is also not
accelerating, so the application of Newton’s second law to this block gives
The values of and T were found with the first set of equations. When these values are substituted into the
second set of equations, we can determine and P. They are

274 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Significance
Understanding what direction in which to draw the friction force is often troublesome. Notice that each friction force
labeled in Figure 6.17 acts in the direction opposite the motion of its corresponding block.
EXAMPLE 6.13
A Crate on an Accelerating Truck
A 50.0-kg crate rests on the bed of a truck as shown in Figure 6.18. The coefficients of friction between the surfaces
are and Find the frictional force on the crate when the truck is accelerating forward relative
to the ground at (a) 2.00 m/s2, and (b) 5.00 m/s2.
FIGURE 6.18 (a) A crate rests on the bed of the truck that is accelerating forward. (b) The free-body diagram of the crate.
Strategy
The forces on the crate are its weight and the normal and frictional forces due to contact with the truck bed. We
start by assuming that the crate is not slipping. In this case, the static frictional force acts on the crate.
Furthermore, the accelerations of the crate and the truck are equal.
Solution
a. Application of Newton’s second law to the crate, using the reference frame attached to the ground, yields
We can now check the validity of our no-slip assumption. The maximum value of the force of static friction is
whereas the actual force of static friction that acts when the truck accelerates forward at is only
Thus, the assumption of no slipping is valid.
b. If the crate is to move with the truck when it accelerates at the force of static friction must be
Since this exceeds the maximum of 196 N, the crate must slip. The frictional force is therefore kinetic and is
The horizontal acceleration of the crate relative to the ground is now found from
Access for free at openstax.org

6.2 • Friction 275
Significance
Relative to the ground, the truck is accelerating forward at and the crate is accelerating forward at
. Hence the crate is sliding backward relative to the bed of the truck with an acceleration
EXAMPLE 6.14
Snowboarding
Earlier, we analyzed the situation of a downhill skier moving at constant velocity to determine the coefficient of
kinetic friction. Now let’s do a similar analysis to determine acceleration. The snowboarder of Figure 6.19 glides
down a slope that is inclined at 13° to the horizontal. The coefficient of kinetic friction between the board and the
snow is What is the acceleration of the snowboarder?
FIGURE 6.19 (a) A snowboarder glides down a slope inclined at 13° to the horizontal. (b) The free-body diagram of the snowboarder.
Strategy
The forces acting on the snowboarder are her weight and the contact force of the slope, which has a component
normal to the incline and a component along the incline (force of kinetic friction). Because she moves along the
slope, the most convenient reference frame for analyzing her motion is one with the x-axis along and the y-axis
perpendicular to the incline. In this frame, both the normal and the frictional forces lie along coordinate axes, the
components of the weight are , and the only
acceleration is along the x-axis
Solution
We can now apply Newton’s second law to the snowboarder:
From the second equation, Upon substituting this into the first equation, we find
Significance
Notice from this equation that if is small enough or is large enough, is negative, that is, the snowboarder