# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 744-751
############################################################

732 15 • Oscillations
15.21
Note that for a simple pendulum, the moment of inertia is and the period reduces to
.
EXAMPLE 15.4
Reducing the Swaying of a Skyscraper
In extreme conditions, skyscrapers can sway up to two meters with a frequency of up to 20.00 Hz due to high winds
or seismic activity. Several companies have developed physical pendulums that are placed on the top of the
skyscrapers. As the skyscraper sways to the right, the pendulum swings to the left, reducing the sway. Assuming the
oscillations have a frequency of 0.50 Hz, design a pendulum that consists of a long beam, of constant density, with a
mass of 100 metric tons and a pivot point at one end of the beam. What should be the length of the beam?
Strategy
We are asked to find the length of the physical pendulum with a known mass. We first need to find the moment of
inertia of the beam. We can then use the equation for the period of a physical pendulum to find the length.
Solution
1. Find the moment of inertia for the CM:
Use the parallel axis theorem to find the moment of inertia about the point of rotation for a rod length L:
2. The period of a physical pendulum with its center of mass a distance l from the pivot point has a period of
. In this problem, L has been defined as the total length of the rod, so . Use the moment
Access for free at openstax.org

15.4 • Pendulums 733
of inertia to solve for the length L:
Significance
There are many ways to reduce the oscillations, including modifying the shape of the skyscrapers, using multiple
physical pendulums, and using tuned-mass dampers.
Torsional Pendulum
A torsional pendulum consists of a rigid body suspended by a light wire or spring (Figure 15.22). When the body is
twisted some small maximum angle and released from rest, the body oscillates between and
. The restoring torque is supplied by the shearing of the string or wire.
FIGURE 15.22 A torsional pendulum consists of a rigid body suspended by a string or wire. The rigid body oscillates between and
.
The restoring torque can be modeled as being proportional to the angle:
The variable kappa is known as the torsion constant of the wire or string. The minus sign shows that the
restoring torque acts in the opposite direction to increasing angular displacement. The net torque is equal to the
moment of inertia times the angular acceleration:
This equation says that the second time derivative of the position (in this case, the angle) equals a negative constant
times the position. This looks very similar to the equation of motion for the SHM , where the period was
found to be . Therefore, the period of the torsional pendulum can be found using
15.22
The units for the torsion constant are and the units for the moment of inertial
are which show that the unit for the period is the second.

734 15 • Oscillations
EXAMPLE 15.5
Measuring the Torsion Constant of a String
A rod has a length of and a mass of 4.00 kg. A string is attached to the CM of the rod and the system is
hung from the ceiling (Figure 15.23). The rod is displaced 10 degrees from the equilibrium position and released
from rest. The rod oscillates with a period of 0.5 s. What is the torsion constant ?
FIGURE 15.23 (a) A rod suspended by a string from the ceiling. (b) Finding the rod’s moment of inertia.
Strategy
We are asked to find the torsion constant of the string. We first need to find the moment of inertia.
Solution
1. Find the moment of inertia for the CM:
2. Calculate the torsion constant using the equation for the period:
Significance
Like the force constant of the system of a block and a spring, the larger the torsion constant, the shorter the period.
15.5 Damped Oscillations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the motion of damped harmonic motion
• Write the equations of motion for damped harmonic oscillations
• Describe the motion of driven, or forced, damped harmonic motion
• Write the equations of motion for forced, damped harmonic motion
In the real world, oscillations seldom follow true SHM. Friction of some sort usually acts to dampen the motion so it
dies away, or needs more force to continue. In this section, we examine some examples of damped harmonic
motion and see how to modify the equations of motion to describe this more general case.
A guitar string stops oscillating a few seconds after being plucked. To keep swinging on a playground swing, you
must keep pushing (Figure 15.24). Although we can often make friction and other nonconservative forces small or
negligible, completely undamped motion is rare. In fact, we may even want to damp oscillations, such as with car
Access for free at openstax.org

15.5 • Damped Oscillations 735
shock absorbers.
FIGURE 15.24 To counteract dampening forces, you need to keep pumping a swing. (credit: Bob Mical)
Figure 15.25 shows a mass m attached to a spring with a force constant The mass is raised to a position , the
initial amplitude, and then released. The mass oscillates around the equilibrium position in a fluid with viscosity but
the amplitude decreases for each oscillation. For a system that has a small amount of damping, the period and
frequency are constant and are nearly the same as for SHM, but the amplitude gradually decreases as shown. This
occurs because the non-conservative damping force removes energy from the system, usually in the form of thermal
energy.
FIGURE 15.25 For a mass on a spring oscillating in a viscous fluid, the period remains constant, but the amplitudes of the oscillations
decrease due to the damping caused by the fluid.
Consider the forces acting on the mass. Note that the only contribution of the weight is to change the equilibrium
position, as discussed earlier in the chapter. Therefore, the net force is equal to the force of the spring and the
damping force . If the magnitude of the velocity is small, meaning the mass oscillates slowly, the damping
force is proportional to the velocity and acts against the direction of motion . The net force on the mass
is therefore
Writing this as a differential equation in x, we obtain
15.23
To determine the solution to this equation, consider the plot of position versus time shown in Figure 15.26. The
curve resembles a cosine curve oscillating in the envelope of an exponential function where . The
solution is

736 15 • Oscillations
15.24
It is left as an exercise to prove that this is, in fact, the solution. To prove that it is the right solution, take the first
and second derivatives with respect to time and substitute them into Equation 15.23. It is found that Equation
15.24 is the solution if
Recall that the angular frequency of a mass undergoing SHM is equal to the square root of the force constant divided
by the mass. This is often referred to as the natural angular frequency, which is represented as
15.25
The angular frequency for damped harmonic motion becomes
15.26
FIGURE 15.26 Position versus time for the mass oscillating on a spring in a viscous fluid. Notice that the curve appears to be a cosine
function inside an exponential envelope.
Recall that when we began this description of damped harmonic motion, we stated that the damping must be small.
Two questions come to mind. Why must the damping be small? And how small is small? If you gradually increase
the amount of damping in a system, the period and frequency begin to be affected, because damping opposes and
hence slows the back and forth motion. (The net force is smaller in both directions.) If there is very large damping,
the system does not even oscillate—it slowly moves toward equilibrium. The angular frequency is equal to
As b increases, becomes smaller and eventually reaches zero when . If b becomes any
larger, becomes a negative number and is a complex number.
Figure 15.27 shows the displacement of a harmonic oscillator for different amounts of damping. When the damping
constant is small, , the system oscillates while the amplitude of the motion decays exponentially. This
Access for free at openstax.org

15.6 • Forced Oscillations 737
system is said to be underdamped, as in curve (a). Many systems are underdamped, and oscillate while the
amplitude decreases exponentially, such as the mass oscillating on a spring. The damping may be quite small, but
eventually the mass comes to rest. If the damping constant is , the system is said to be critically
damped, as in curve (b). An example of a critically damped system is the shock absorbers in a car. It is
advantageous to have the oscillations decay as fast as possible. Here, the system does not oscillate, but
asymptotically approaches the equilibrium condition as quickly as possible. Curve (c) in Figure 15.27 represents an
overdamped system where An overdamped system will approach equilibrium over a longer period of
time.
FIGURE 15.27 The position versus time for three systems consisting of a mass and a spring in a viscous fluid. (a) If the damping is small
, the mass oscillates, slowly losing amplitude as the energy is dissipated by the non-conservative force(s). The limiting case
is (b) where the damping is . (c) If the damping is very large , the mass does not oscillate when displaced, but
attempts to return to the equilibrium position.
Critical damping is often desired, because such a system returns to equilibrium rapidly and remains at equilibrium
as well. In addition, a constant force applied to a critically damped system moves the system to a new equilibrium
position in the shortest time possible without overshooting or oscillating about the new position.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.5
Why are completely undamped harmonic oscillators so rare?
15.6 Forced Oscillations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define forced oscillations
• List the equations of motion associated with forced oscillations
• Explain the concept of resonance and its impact on the amplitude of an oscillator
• List the characteristics of a system oscillating in resonance
Sit in front of a piano sometime and sing a loud brief note at it with the dampers off its strings (Figure 15.28). It will
sing the same note back at you—the strings, having the same frequencies as your voice, are resonating in response
to the forces from the sound waves that you sent to them. This is a good example of the fact that objects—in this
case, piano strings—can be forced to oscillate, and oscillate most easily at their natural frequency. In this section,
we briefly explore applying a periodic driving force acting on a simple harmonic oscillator. The driving force puts
energy into the system at a certain frequency, not necessarily the same as the natural frequency of the system.
Recall that the natural frequency is the frequency at which a system would oscillate if there were no driving and no
damping force.

738 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.28 You can cause the strings in a piano to vibrate simply by producing sound waves from your voice. (credit: Matt Billings)
Most of us have played with toys involving an object supported on an elastic band, something like the paddle ball
suspended from a finger in Figure 15.29. Imagine the finger in the figure is your finger. At first, you hold your finger
steady, and the ball bounces up and down with a small amount of damping. If you move your finger up and down
slowly, the ball follows along without bouncing much on its own. As you increase the frequency at which you move
your finger up and down, the ball responds by oscillating with increasing amplitude. When you drive the ball at its
natural frequency, the ball’s oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation for as long as you drive it. The
phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency equal to its natural frequency is called resonance. A system being
driven at its natural frequency is said to resonate. As the driving frequency gets progressively higher than the
resonant or natural frequency, the amplitude of the oscillations becomes smaller until the oscillations nearly
disappear, and your finger simply moves up and down with little effect on the ball.
FIGURE 15.29 The paddle ball on its rubber band moves in response to the finger supporting it. If the finger moves with the natural
frequency of the ball on the rubber band, then a resonance is achieved, and the amplitude of the ball’s oscillations increases
dramatically. At higher and lower driving frequencies, energy is transferred to the ball less efficiently, and it responds with lower-amplitude
oscillations.
Consider a simple experiment. Attach a mass m to a spring in a viscous fluid, similar to the apparatus discussed in
the damped harmonic oscillator. This time, instead of fixing the free end of the spring, attach the free end to a disk
that is driven by a variable-speed motor. The motor turns with an angular driving frequency of . The rotating disk
provides energy to the system by the work done by the driving force . The experimental apparatus
is shown in Figure 15.30.
Access for free at openstax.org