# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 400-405
############################################################

390 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
Theconventionalcurrentflowsfromthepositiveterminaltothenegativeterminal,butdependingontheactualsituation,
positivecharges,negativecharges,orbothmaymove.Inmetalwires,forexample,currentiscarriedbyelectrons—thatis,
negative charges move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water, both positive and negative charges move. This is also true
innervecells.AVandeGraaffgenerator,usedfornuclearresearch,canproduceacurrentofpurepositivecharges,such
as protons. In the Tevatron Accelerator at Fermilab, before it was shut down in 2011, beams of protons and antiprotons
travelinginoppositedirectionswerecollided.Theprotonsarepositiveandthereforetheircurrentisinthesamedirectionas
theytravel.Theantiprotonsarenegativitychargedandthustheircurrentisintheoppositedirectionthattheactualparticles
travel.
AcloserlookatthecurrentflowingthroughawireisshowninFigure9.6.Thefigureillustratesthemovementofcharged
particlesthatcomposeacurrent.Thefactthatconventionalcurrentistakentobeinthedirectionthatpositivechargewould
flow can be traced back to American scientist and statesman Benjamin Franklin in the 1700s. Having no knowledge of
the particles that make up the atom (namely the proton, electron, and neutron), Franklin believed that electrical current
flowed from a material that had more of an “electrical fluid” and to a material that had less of this “electrical fluid.” He
coinedthetermpositiveforthematerialthathadmoreofthiselectricalfluidandnegativeforthematerialthatlackedthe
electricalfluid.Hesurmisedthatcurrentwouldflowfromthematerialwithmoreelectricalfluid—thepositivematerial—to
thenegativematerial,whichhaslesselectricalfluid.Franklincalledthisdirectionofcurrentapositivecurrentflow.This
was pretty advanced thinking for a man who knew nothing about the atom.
Figure 9.6 CurrentIis the rate at which charge moves through an areaA, such as the cross-
section of a wire. Conventional current is defined to move in the direction of the electrical field.
(a) Positive charges move in the direction of the electrical field, which is the same direction as
conventional current. (b) Negative charges move in the direction opposite to the electrical field.
Conventional current is in the direction opposite to the movement of negative charge. The flow
of electrons is sometimes referred to as electronic flow.
Wenowknowthatamaterial ispositiveifithasagreaternumberofprotonsthanelectrons,anditisnegativeifithasa
greaternumberofelectronsthanprotons.Inaconductingmetal,thecurrentflowisdueprimarilytoelectronsflowingfrom
thenegativematerialtothepositivematerial,butforhistoricalreasons,weconsiderthepositivecurrentflowandthecurrent
is shown to flow from the positive terminal of the battery to the negative terminal.
Itisimportanttorealizethatanelectricalfieldispresentinconductorsandisresponsibleforproducingthecurrent(Figure
9.6). In previous chapters, we considered the static electrical case, where charges in a conductor quickly redistribute
themselves on the surface of the conductor in order to cancel out the external electrical field and restore equilibrium. In
thecaseofanelectricalcircuit,thechargesarepreventedfromeverreachingequilibriumbyanexternalsourceofelectric
potential, such as a battery. The energy needed to move the charge is supplied by the electric potential from the battery.
Althoughtheelectricalfieldisresponsibleforthemotionofthechargesintheconductor,theworkdoneonthechargesby
theelectricalfielddoesnotincreasethekineticenergyofthecharges.Wewillshowthattheelectricalfieldisresponsible
for keeping the electric charges moving at a “drift velocity.”
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 391
9.2 | Model of Conduction in Metals
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the drift velocity of charges moving through a metal
• Define the vector current density
• Describe the operation of an incandescent lamp
When electrons move through a conducting wire, they do not move at a constant velocity, that is, the electrons do not
moveinastraightlineataconstantspeed.Rather,theyinteractwithandcollidewithatomsandotherfreeelectronsinthe
conductor.Thus,theelectronsmoveinazig-zagfashionanddriftthroughthewire.Weshouldalsonotethateventhough
itisconvenienttodiscussthedirectionofcurrent,currentisascalarquantity.Whendiscussingthevelocityofchargesina
current, it is more appropriate to discuss the current density. We will come back to this idea at the end of this section.
Drift Velocity
Electrical signals move very rapidly. Telephone conversations carried by currents in wires cover large distances without
noticeabledelays.Lightscomeonassoonasalightswitchismovedtothe‘on’position.Mostelectricalsignalscarriedby
currentstravelatspeedsontheorderof 10 8 m/s,asignificantfractionofthespeedoflight.Interestingly,theindividual
chargesthatmakeupthecurrentmovemuchsloweronaverage,typicallydriftingatspeedsontheorderof 10−4m/s.How
do we reconcile these two speeds, and what does it tell us about standard conductors?
The high speed of electrical signals results from the fact that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance. Thus,
whenafreechargeisforcedintoawire,asinFigure9.7,theincomingchargepushesotherchargesaheadofitduetothe
repulsiveforcebetweenlikecharges.Thesemovingchargespushonchargesfartherdowntheline.Thedensityofchargein
asystemcannoteasilybeincreased,sothesignalispassedonrapidly.Theresultingelectricalshockwavemovesthrough
thesystematnearlythespeedoflight.Tobeprecise,thisfast-movingsignal,orshockwave,isarapidlypropagatingchange
in the electrical field.
Figure 9.7 When charged particles are forced into this volume
of a conductor, an equal number are quickly forced to leave. The
repulsion between like charges makes it difficult to increase the
number of charges in a volume. Thus, as one charge enters,
another leaves almost immediately, carrying the signal rapidly
forward.
Goodconductorshavelargenumbersoffreecharges.Inmetals,thefreechargesarefreeelectrons.(Infact,goodelectrical
conductorsareoftengoodheatconductorstoo,becauselargenumbersoffreeelectronscantransportthermalenergyaswell
ascarryelectricalcurrent.)Figure9.8showshowfreeelectronsmovethroughanordinaryconductor.Thedistancethatan
individualelectroncanmovebetweencollisionswithatomsorotherelectronsisquitesmall.Theelectronpathsthusappear
nearlyrandom,likethemotionofatomsinagas.Butthereisanelectricalfieldintheconductorthatcausestheelectronsto
driftinthedirectionshown(oppositetothefield,sincetheyarenegative).Thedriftvelocity → v istheaveragevelocity
d
ofthefreecharges.Driftvelocityisquitesmall,sincetherearesomanyfreecharges.Ifwehaveanestimateofthedensity
offreeelectronsinaconductor,wecancalculatethedriftvelocityforagivencurrent.Thelargerthedensity,thelowerthe
velocity required for a given current.

392 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
Figure 9.8 Free electrons moving in a conductor make many
collisions with other electrons and other particles. A typical path
of one electron is shown. The average velocity of the free
charges is called the drift velocity → v and for electrons, it is
d
in the direction opposite to the electrical field. The collisions
normally transfer energy to the conductor, requiring a constant
supply of energy to maintain a steady current.
Free-electroncollisionstransferenergytotheatomsoftheconductor.Theelectricalfielddoesworkinmovingtheelectrons
throughadistance,butthatworkdoesnotincreasethekineticenergy(norspeed)oftheelectrons.Theworkistransferredto
theconductor’satoms,oftenincreasingtemperature.Thus,acontinuouspowerinputisrequiredtokeepacurrentflowing.
(Anexceptionissuperconductors,forreasonsweshallexploreinalaterchapter.Superconductorscanhaveasteadycurrent
withoutacontinualsupplyofenergy—agreatenergysavings.)Foraconductorthatisnotasuperconductor,thesupplyof
energycanbeuseful,asinanincandescentlightbulbfilament(Figure9.9).Thesupplyofenergyisnecessarytoincrease
the temperature of the tungsten filament, so that the filament glows.
Figure 9.9 The incandescent lamp is a simple design. A tungsten filament is placed in a partially
evacuated glass envelope. One end of the filament is attached to the screw base, which is made out of a
conducting material. The second end of the filament is attached to a second contact in the base of the bulb.
The two contacts are separated by an insulating material. Current flows through the filament, and the
temperature of the filament becomes large enough to cause the filament to glow and produce light.
However, these bulbs are not very energy efficient, as evident from the heat coming from the bulb. In the
year 2012, the United States, along with many other countries, began to phase out incandescent lamps in
favor of more energy-efficient lamps, such as light-emitting diode (LED) lamps and compact fluorescent
lamps (CFL) (credit right: modification of work by Serge Saint).
We can obtain an expression for the relationship between current and drift velocity by considering the number of free
charges in a segment of wire, as illustrated in Figure 9.10. The number of free charges per unit volume, or the number
number of charges
densityoffreecharges,isgiventhesymbolnwhere n= .Thevalueofndependsonthematerial.The
volume
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 393
shadedsegmenthasavolume Av dt,sothatthenumberoffreechargesinthevolumeis nAv dt.ThechargedQinthis
d d
segmentisthus qnAv dt,whereqistheamountofchargeoneachcarrier.(Themagnitudeofthechargeofelectronsis
d
q=1.60×10 −19 C.)Currentischargemovedperunittime;thus,ifalltheoriginalchargesmoveoutofthissegmentin
timedt, the current is
dQ
I = =qnAv .
dt d
Rearranging terms gives
I (9.4)
v =
d nqA
where v is the drift velocity, n is the free charge density, A is the cross-sectional area of the wire, and I is the current
d
through the wire. The carriers of the current each have chargeqand move with a drift velocity of magnitude v .
d
Figure 9.10 All the charges in the shaded volume of this wire
move out in a timedt, having a drift velocity of magnitude v .
d
Note that simple drift velocity is not the entire story. The speed of an electron is sometimes much greater than its drift
velocity.Inaddition,notalloftheelectronsinaconductorcanmovefreely,andthosethatdomovemightmovesomewhat
faster or slower than the drift velocity. So what do we mean by free electrons?
Atomsinametallicconductorarepackedintheformofalatticestructure.Someelectronsarefarenoughawayfromthe
atomicnucleithattheydonotexperiencetheattractionofthenucleiasstronglyastheinnerelectronsdo.Thesearethefree
electrons.Theyarenotboundtoasingleatombutcaninsteadmovefreelyamongtheatomsina“sea”ofelectrons.When
anelectricalfieldisapplied,thesefreeelectronsrespondbyaccelerating.Astheymove,theycollidewiththeatomsinthe
latticeandwithotherelectrons,generatingthermalenergy,andtheconductorgetswarmer.Inaninsulator,theorganization
of the atoms and the structure do not allow for such free electrons.
As you know, electric power is usually supplied to equipment and appliances through round wires made of a conducting
material (copper, aluminum, silver, or gold) that are stranded or solid. The diameter of the wire determines the current-
carrying capacity—the larger the diameter, the greater the current-carrying capacity. Even though the current-carrying
capacity is determined by the diameter, wire is not normally characterized by the diameter directly. Instead, wire is
commonlysoldinaunitknownas“gauge.”Wiresaremanufacturedbypassingthematerialthroughcircularformscalled
“drawingdies.”Inordertomakethinnerwires,manufacturersdrawthewiresthroughmultiplediesofsuccessivelythinner
diameter. Historically, the gauge of the wire was related to the number of drawing processes required to manufacture
the wire. For this reason, the larger the gauge, the smaller the diameter. In the United States, the American Wire Gauge
(AWG)wasdevelopedtostandardizethesystem.Householdwiringcommonlyconsistsof10-gauge(2.588-mmdiameter)
to 14-gauge (1.628-mm diameter) wire. A device used to measure the gauge of wire is shown inFigure 9.11.

394 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
Figure 9.11 A device for measuring the gauge of electrical
wire. As you can see, higher gauge numbers indicate thinner
wires. (credit: Joseph J. Trout)
Example 9.3
Calculating Drift Velocity in a Common Wire
Calculate the drift velocity of electrons in a copper wire with a diameter of 2.053 mm (12-gauge) carrying a
20.0-Acurrent,giventhatthereisonefreeelectronpercopperatom.(Householdwiringoftencontains12-gauge
copper wire, and the maximum current allowed in such wire is usually 20.0 A.) The density of copper is
8.80×10 3 kg/m 3 and the atomic mass of copper is 63.54 g/mol.
Strategy
We can calculate the drift velocity using the equation I =nqAv . The current is I =20.00A and
d
q=1.60×10 −19 C isthechargeofanelectron.Wecancalculatetheareaofacross-sectionofthewireusing
theformula A=πr2,whererisone-halfthediameter.Thegivendiameteris2.053mm,soris1.0265mm.We
aregiventhedensityofcopper, 8.80×10 3 kg/m 3,andtheatomicmassofcopperis 63.54g/mol.Wecanuse
thesetwoquantitiesalongwithAvogadro’snumber, 6.02×10 23 atoms/mol,todeterminen,thenumberoffree
electrons per cubic meter.
Solution
First,wecalculatethedensityoffreeelectronsincopper.Thereisonefreeelectronpercopperatom.Therefore,
the number of free electrons is the same as the number of copper atoms per m 3. We can now findnas follows:
n = 1e− × 6.02×10 23 atoms × 1mol × 1000g × 8.80×10 3 kg
atom mol 63.54g kg 1m 3
=8.34×10
28e−
/m
3
.
The cross-sectional area of the wire is
2
⎛ −3 ⎞
A=πr2=π 2.05×10 m =3.30×10 −6 m2.
⎝ 2 ⎠
Rearranging I =nqAv to isolate drift velocity gives
d
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9