# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 328-334
############################################################

316 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
7.4
The work done by a constant force of gravity on an object depends only on the object’s weight and the difference in
height through which the object is displaced. Gravity does negative work on an object that moves upward
( ), or, in other words, you must do positive work against gravity to lift an object upward. Alternately, gravity
does positive work on an object that moves downward ( ), or you do negative work against gravity to “lift”
an object downward, controlling its descent so it doesn’t drop to the ground. (“Lift” is used as opposed to “drop”.)
EXAMPLE 7.3
Shelving a Book
You lift an oversized library book, weighing 20 N, 1 m vertically down from a shelf, and carry it 3 m horizontally to a
table (Figure 7.5). (a) How much work does gravity do on the book? (b) When you’re finished, you move the book in a
straight line back to its original place on the shelf. What was the total work done against gravity, moving the book
away from its original position on the shelf and back again?
FIGURE 7.5 Side view of the paths for moving a book to and from a shelf.
Strategy
We have just seen that the work done by a constant force of gravity depends only on the weight of the object moved
and the difference in height for the path taken, . We can evaluate the difference in height to
answer (a) and (b).
Solution
a. Since the book starts on the shelf and is lifted down , we have
b. There is zero difference in height for any path that begins and ends at the same place on the shelf, so
Significance
Gravity does positive work (20 J) when the book moves down from the shelf. The gravitational force between two
objects is an attractive force, which does positive work when the objects get closer together. Gravity does zero work
(0 J) when the book moves horizontally from the shelf to the table and negative work (−20 J) when the book moves
from the table back to the shelf. The total work done by gravity is zero Unlike friction or
other dissipative forces, described in Example 7.2, the total work done against gravity, over any closed path, is zero.
Positive work is done against gravity on the upward parts of a closed path, but an equal amount of negative work is
done against gravity on the downward parts. In other words, work done against gravity, lifting an object up, is “given
back” when the object comes back down. Forces like gravity (those that do zero work over any closed path) are
classified as conservative forces and play an important role in physics.
Access for free at openstax.org

7.1 • Work 317
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.2
Can Earth’s gravity ever be a constant force for all paths?
Work Done by Forces that Vary
In general, forces may vary in magnitude and direction at points in space, and paths between two points may be
curved. The infinitesimal work done by a variable force can be expressed in terms of the components of the force
and the displacement along the path,
Here, the components of the force are functions of position along the path, and the displacements depend on the
equations of the path. (Although we chose to illustrate dW in Cartesian coordinates, other coordinates are better
suited to some situations.) Equation 7.2 defines the total work as a line integral, or the limit of a sum of infinitesimal
amounts of work. The physical concept of work is straightforward: you calculate the work for tiny displacements and
add them up. Sometimes the mathematics can seem complicated, but the following example demonstrates how
cleanly they can operate.
EXAMPLE 7.4
Work Done by a Variable Force over a Curved Path
An object moves along a parabolic path from the origin to the point
under the action of a force (Figure 7.6). Calculate the work done.
FIGURE 7.6 The parabolic path of a particle acted on by a given force.
Strategy
The components of the force are given functions of x and y. We can use the equation of the path to express y and dy
in terms of x and dx; namely,
Then, the integral for the work is just a definite integral of a function of x.
Solution
The infinitesimal element of work is
The integral of is so
Significance
This integral was not hard to do. You can follow the same steps, as in this example, to calculate line integrals

318 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
representing work for more complicated forces and paths. In this example, everything was given in terms of x- and
y-components, which are easiest to use in evaluating the work in this case. In other situations, magnitudes and
angles might be easier.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.3
Find the work done by the same force in Example 7.4 over a cubic path, , between the same
points and
One very important and widely applicable variable force is the force exerted by a perfectly elastic spring, which
satisfies Hooke’s law where k is the spring constant, and is the displacement from the
spring’s unstretched (equilibrium) position (Newton’s Laws of Motion). Note that the unstretched position is only the
same as the equilibrium position if no other forces are acting (or, if they are, they cancel one another). Forces
between molecules, or in any system undergoing small displacements from a stable equilibrium, behave
approximately like a spring force.
To calculate the work done by a spring force, we can choose the x-axis along the length of the spring, in the direction
of increasing length, as in Figure 7.7, with the origin at the equilibrium position (Then positive x
corresponds to a stretch and negative x to a compression.) With this choice of coordinates, the spring force has only
an x-component, , and the work done when x changes from to is
7.5
FIGURE 7.7 (a) The spring exerts no force at its equilibrium position. The spring exerts a force in the opposite direction to (b) an extension
or stretch, and (c) a compression.
Notice that depends only on the starting and ending points, A and B, and is independent of the actual path
between them, as long as it starts at A and ends at B. That is, the actual path could involve going back and forth
before ending.
Another interesting thing to notice about Equation 7.5 is that, for this one-dimensional case, you can readily see the
correspondence between the work done by a force and the area under the curve of the force versus its
displacement. Recall that, in general, a one-dimensional integral is the limit of the sum of infinitesimals, ,
representing the area of strips, as shown in Figure 7.8. In Equation 7.5, since is a straight line with slope
Access for free at openstax.org

7.1 • Work 319
, when plotted versus x, the “area” under the line is just an algebraic combination of triangular “areas,” where
“areas” above the x-axis are positive and those below are negative, as shown in Figure 7.9. The magnitude of one of
these “areas” is just one-half the triangle’s base, along the x-axis, times the triangle’s height, along the force axis.
(There are quotation marks around “area” because this base-height product has the units of work, rather than
square meters.)
FIGURE 7.8 A curve of f(x) versus x showing the area of an infinitesimal strip, f(x)dx, and the sum of such areas, which is the integral of f(x)
from to .
FIGURE 7.9 Curve of the spring force versus x, showing areas under the line, between and , for both positive and
negative values of . When is negative, the total area under the curve for the integral in Equation 7.5 is the sum of positive and
negative triangular areas. When is positive, the total area under the curve is the difference between two negative triangles.
EXAMPLE 7.5
Work Done by a Spring Force
A perfectly elastic spring requires 0.54 J of work to stretch 6 cm from its equilibrium position, as in Figure 7.7(b). (a)
What is its spring constant k? (b) How much work is required to stretch it an additional 6 cm?
Strategy
Work “required” means work done against the spring force, which is the negative of the work in Equation 7.5, that is
For part (a), and ; for part (b), and . In part (a), the work is given and you
can solve for the spring constant; in part (b), you can use the value of k, from part (a), to solve for the work.
Solution
a. , so
b.
Significance
Since the work done by a spring force is independent of the path, you only needed to calculate the difference in the
quantity at the end points. Notice that the work required to stretch the spring from 0 to 12 cm is four times
that required to stretch it from 0 to 6 cm, because that work depends on the square of the amount of stretch from

320 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
equilibrium, . In this circumstance, the work to stretch the spring from 0 to 12 cm is also equal to the work for
a composite path from 0 to 6 cm followed by an additional stretch from 6 cm to 12 cm. Therefore,
, or , as we
found above.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.4
The spring in Example 7.5 is compressed 6 cm from its equilibrium length. (a) Does the spring force do positive or
negative work and (b) what is the magnitude?
7.2 Kinetic Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the kinetic energy of a particle given its mass and its velocity or momentum
• Evaluate the kinetic energy of a body, relative to different frames of reference
It’s plausible to suppose that the greater the velocity of a body, the greater effect it could have on other bodies. This
does not depend on the direction of the velocity, only its magnitude. At the end of the seventeenth century, a
quantity was introduced into mechanics to explain collisions between two perfectly elastic bodies, in which one
body makes a head-on collision with an identical body at rest. The first body stops, and the second body moves off
with the initial velocity of the first body. (If you have ever played billiards or croquet, or seen a model of Newton’s
Cradle, you have observed this type of collision.) The idea behind this quantity was related to the forces acting on a
body and was referred to as “the energy of motion.” Later on, during the eighteenth century, the name kinetic
energy was given to energy of motion.
With this history in mind, we can now state the classical definition of kinetic energy. Note that when we say
“classical,” we mean non-relativistic, that is, at speeds much less that the speed of light. At speeds comparable to
the speed of light, the special theory of relativity requires a different expression for the kinetic energy of a particle,
as discussed in Relativity (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction).
Since objects (or systems) of interest vary in complexity, we first define the kinetic energy of a particle with mass m.
KINETIC ENERGY
The kinetic energy of a particle is one-half the product of the particle’s mass m and the square of its speed v:
7.6
We then extend this definition to any system of particles by adding up the kinetic energies of all the constituent
particles:
7.7
Note that just as we can express Newton’s second law in terms of either the rate of change of momentum or mass
times the rate of change of velocity, so the kinetic energy of a particle can be expressed in terms of its mass and
momentum instead of its mass and velocity. Since , we see that
also expresses the kinetic energy of a single particle. Sometimes, this expression is more convenient to use than
Equation 7.6.
The units of kinetic energy are mass times the square of speed, or . But the units of force are mass times
Access for free at openstax.org

7.2 • Kinetic Energy 321
acceleration, , so the units of kinetic energy are also the units of force times distance, which are the units
of work, or joules. You will see in the next section that work and kinetic energy have the same units, because they
are different forms of the same, more general, physical property.
EXAMPLE 7.6
Kinetic Energy of an Object
(a) What is the kinetic energy of an 80-kg athlete, running at 10 m/s? (b) The Chicxulub crater in Yucatan, one of the
largest existing impact craters on Earth, is thought to have been created by an asteroid, traveling at
22 km/s and releasing of kinetic energy upon impact. What was its mass? (c) In nuclear reactors,
thermal neutrons, traveling at about 2.2 km/s, play an important role. What is the kinetic energy of such a particle?
Strategy
To answer these questions, you can use the definition of kinetic energy in Equation 7.6. You also have to look up the
mass of a neutron.
Solution
Don’t forget to convert km into m to do these calculations, although, to save space, we omitted showing these
conversions.
a.
b.
c.
Significance
In this example, we used the way mass and speed are related to kinetic energy, and we encountered a very wide
range of values for the kinetic energies. Different units are commonly used for such very large and very small values.
The energy of the impactor in part (b) can be compared to the explosive yield of TNT and nuclear explosions,
The Chicxulub asteroid’s kinetic energy was about a hundred million megatons. At the
other extreme, the energy of subatomic particle is expressed in electron-volts, The thermal
neutron in part (c) has a kinetic energy of about one fortieth of an electron-volt.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.5
(a) A car and a truck are each moving with the same kinetic energy. Assume that the truck has more mass than the
car. Which has the greater speed? (b) A car and a truck are each moving with the same speed. Which has the greater
kinetic energy?
Because velocity is a relative quantity, you can see that the value of kinetic energy must depend on your frame of
reference. You can generally choose a frame of reference that is suited to the purpose of your analysis and that
simplifies your calculations. One such frame of reference is the one in which the observations of the system are
made (likely an external frame). Another choice is a frame that is attached to, or moves with, the system (likely an
internal frame). The equations for relative motion, discussed in Motion in Two and Three Dimensions, provide a link
to calculating the kinetic energy of an object with respect to different frames of reference.
EXAMPLE 7.7
Kinetic Energy Relative to Different Frames
A 75.0-kg person walks down the central aisle of a subway car at a speed of 1.50 m/s relative to the car, whereas
the train is moving at 15.0 m/s relative to the tracks. (a) What is the person’s kinetic energy relative to the car? (b)
What is the person’s kinetic energy relative to the tracks? (c) What is the person’s kinetic energy relative to a frame