# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 736-744
############################################################

724 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.16 The Lennard-Jones potential energy function for a system of two neutral atoms. If the energy is below some maximum
energy, the system oscillates near the equilibrium position between the two turning points.
From the graph, you can see that there is a potential energy well, which has some similarities to the potential energy
well of the potential energy function of the simple harmonic oscillator discussed in Figure 15.13. The Lennard-Jones
potential has a stable equilibrium point where the potential energy is minimum and the force on either side of the
equilibrium point points toward equilibrium point. Note that unlike the simple harmonic oscillator, the potential well
of the Lennard-Jones potential is not symmetric. This is due to the fact that the force between the atoms is not a
Hooke’s law force and is not linear. The atoms can still oscillate around the equilibrium position because when
, the force is positive; when , the force is negative. Notice that as x approaches zero, the slope is
quite steep and negative, which means that the force is large and positive. This suggests that it takes a large force to
try to push the atoms close together. As x becomes increasingly large, the slope becomes less steep and the force is
smaller and negative. This suggests that if given a large enough energy, the atoms can be separated.
If you are interested in this interaction, find the force between the molecules by taking the derivative of the potential
energy function. You will see immediately that the force does not resemble a Hooke’s law force , but if
you are familiar with the binomial theorem:
the force can be approximated by a Hooke’s law force.
Velocity and Energy Conservation
Getting back to the system of a block and a spring in Figure 15.11, once the block is released from rest, it begins to
move in the negative direction toward the equilibrium position. The potential energy decreases and the magnitude
of the velocity and the kinetic energy increase. At time , the block reaches the equilibrium position
where the force on the block and the potential energy are zero. At the equilibrium position, the block
reaches a negative velocity with a magnitude equal to the maximum velocity . The kinetic energy is
maximum and equal to At this point, the force on the block is zero, but
momentum carries the block, and it continues in the negative direction toward . As the block continues to
move, the force on it acts in the positive direction and the magnitude of the velocity and kinetic energy decrease.
The potential energy increases as the spring compresses. At time , the block reaches . Here the
velocity and kinetic energy are equal to zero. The force on the block is and the potential energy stored in
the spring is . During the oscillations, the total energy is constant and equal to the sum of the potential
energy and the kinetic energy of the system,
Access for free at openstax.org

15.3 • Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion 725
15.12
The equation for the energy associated with SHM can be solved to find the magnitude of the velocity at any position:
15.13
The energy in a simple harmonic oscillator is proportional to the square of the amplitude. When considering many
forms of oscillations, you will find the energy proportional to the amplitude squared.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.1
Why would it hurt more if you snapped your hand with a ruler than with a loose spring, even if the displacement of
each system is equal?
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.2
Identify one way you could decrease the maximum velocity of a simple harmonic oscillator.
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how the sine and cosine functions relate to the concepts of circular motion
• Describe the connection between simple harmonic motion and circular motion
An easy way to model SHM is by considering uniform circular motion. Figure 15.17 shows one way of using this
method. A peg (a cylinder of wood) is attached to a vertical disk, rotating with a constant angular frequency. Figure
15.18 shows a side view of the disk and peg. If a lamp is placed above the disk and peg, the peg produces a shadow.
Let the disk have a radius of and define the position of the shadow that coincides with the center line of the
disk to be . As the disk rotates at a constant rate, the shadow oscillates between and .
Now imagine a block on a spring beneath the floor as shown in Figure 15.18.

726 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.17 SHM can be modeled as rotational motion by looking at the shadow of a peg on a wheel rotating at a constant angular
frequency.
Access for free at openstax.org

15.3 • Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion 727
FIGURE 15.18 Light shines down on the disk so that the peg makes a shadow. If the disk rotates at just the right angular frequency, the
shadow follows the motion of the block on a spring. If there is no energy dissipated due to nonconservative forces, the block and the
shadow will oscillate back and forth in unison. In this figure, four snapshots are taken at four different times. (a) The wheel starts at
and the shadow of the peg is at , representing the mass at position . (b) As the disk rotates through an angle , the
shadow of the peg is between and . (c) The disk continues to rotate until , at which the shadow follows the mass to
. (d) The disk continues to rotate, the shadow follows the position of the mass.
If the disk turns at the proper angular frequency, the shadow follows along with the block. The position of the
shadow can be modeled with the equation
15.14
Recall that the block attached to the spring does not move at a constant velocity. How often does the wheel have to
turn to have the peg’s shadow always on the block? The disk must turn at a constant angular frequency equal to
times the frequency of oscillation .
Figure 15.19 shows the basic relationship between uniform circular motion and SHM. The peg lies at the tip of the
radius, a distance A from the center of the disk. The x-axis is defined by a line drawn parallel to the ground, cutting

728 15 • Oscillations
the disk in half. The y-axis (not shown) is defined by a line perpendicular to the ground, cutting the disk into a left
half and a right half. The center of the disk is the point The projection of the position of the peg onto
the fixed x-axis gives the position of the shadow, which undergoes SHM analogous to the system of the block and
spring. At the time shown in the figure, the projection has position x and moves to the left with velocity v. The
tangential velocity of the peg around the circle equals of the block on the spring. The x-component of the
velocity is equal to the velocity of the block on the spring.
FIGURE 15.19 A peg moving on a circular path with a constant angular velocity is undergoing uniform circular motion. Its projection on
the x-axis undergoes SHM. Also shown is the velocity of the peg around the circle, , and its projection, which is v. Note that these
velocities form a similar triangle to the displacement triangle.
We can use Figure 15.19 to analyze the velocity of the shadow as the disk rotates. The peg moves in a circle with a
speed of . The shadow moves with a velocity equal to the component of the peg’s velocity that is parallel
to the surface where the shadow is being produced:
15.15
It follows that the acceleration is
15.16
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.3
Identify an object that undergoes uniform circular motion. Describe how you could trace the SHM of this object.
15.4 Pendulums
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the forces that act on a simple pendulum
• Determine the angular frequency, frequency, and period of a simple pendulum in terms of the length of
the pendulum and the acceleration due to gravity
• Define the period for a physical pendulum
• Define the period for a torsional pendulum
Pendulums are in common usage. Grandfather clocks use a pendulum to keep time and a pendulum can be used to
Access for free at openstax.org

15.4 • Pendulums 729
measure the acceleration due to gravity. For small displacements, a pendulum is a simple harmonic oscillator.
The Simple Pendulum
A simple pendulum is defined to have a point mass, also known as the pendulum bob, which is suspended from a
string of length L with negligible mass (Figure 15.20). Here, the only forces acting on the bob are the force of gravity
(i.e., the weight of the bob) and tension from the string. The mass of the string is assumed to be negligible as
compared to the mass of the bob.
FIGURE 15.20 A simple pendulum has a small-diameter bob and a string that has a very small mass but is strong enough not to stretch
appreciably. The linear displacement from equilibrium is s, the length of the arc. Also shown are the forces on the bob, which result in a net
force of toward the equilibrium position—that is, a restoring force.
Consider the torque on the pendulum. The force providing the restoring torque is the component of the weight of the
pendulum bob that acts along the arc length. The torque is the length of the string L times the component of the net
force that is perpendicular to the radius of the arc. The minus sign indicates the torque acts in the opposite direction
of the angular displacement:
The solution to this differential equation involves advanced calculus, and is beyond the scope of this text. But note
that for small angles (less than 15 degrees or about 0.26 radians), and differ by less than 1%, if θ is
measured in radians. We can then use the small angle approximation The angle describes the position
of the pendulum. Using the small angle approximation gives an approximate solution for small angles,
15.17
Because this equation has the same form as the equation for SHM, the solution is easy to find. The angular
frequency is
15.18
and the period is

730 15 • Oscillations
15.19
The period of a simple pendulum depends on its length and the acceleration due to gravity. The period is completely
independent of other factors, such as mass and the maximum displacement. As with simple harmonic oscillators,
the period T for a pendulum is nearly independent of amplitude, especially if is less than about Even simple
pendulum clocks can be finely adjusted and remain accurate.
Note the dependence of T on g. If the length of a pendulum is precisely known, it can actually be used to measure
the acceleration due to gravity, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 15.3
Measuring Acceleration due to Gravity by the Period of a Pendulum
What is the acceleration due to gravity in a region where a simple pendulum having a length 75.000 cm has a period
of 1.7357 s?
Strategy
We are asked to find g given the period T and the length L of a pendulum. We can solve for g, assuming
only that the angle of deflection is less than .
Solution
1. Square and solve for g:
2. Substitute known values into the new equation:
3. Calculate to find g:
Significance
This method for determining g can be very accurate, which is why length and period are given to five digits in this
example. For the precision of the approximation to be better than the precision of the pendulum length
and period, the maximum displacement angle should be kept below about .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.4
An engineer builds two simple pendulums. Both are suspended from small wires secured to the ceiling of a room.
Each pendulum hovers 2 cm above the floor. Pendulum 1 has a bob with a mass of 10 kg. Pendulum 2 has a bob
with a mass of 100 kg. Describe how the motion of the pendulums will differ if the bobs are both displaced by .
Physical Pendulum
Any object can oscillate like a pendulum. Consider a coffee mug hanging on a hook in the pantry. If the mug gets
knocked, it oscillates back and forth like a pendulum until the oscillations die out. We have described a simple
pendulum as a point mass and a string. A physical pendulum is any object whose oscillations are similar to those of
the simple pendulum, but cannot be modeled as a point mass on a string, and the mass distribution must be
included into the equation of motion.
Access for free at openstax.org

15.4 • Pendulums 731
As for the simple pendulum, the restoring force of the physical pendulum is the force of gravity. With the simple
pendulum, the force of gravity acts on the center of the pendulum bob. In the case of the physical pendulum, the
force of gravity acts on the center of mass (CM) of an object. The object oscillates about a point O. Consider an
object of a generic shape as shown in Figure 15.21.
FIGURE 15.21 A physical pendulum is any object that oscillates as a pendulum, but cannot be modeled as a point mass on a string. The
force of gravity acts on the center of mass (CM) and provides the restoring force that causes the object to oscillate. The minus sign on the
component of the weight that provides the restoring force is present because the force acts in the opposite direction of the increasing angle
.
When a physical pendulum is hanging from a point but is free to rotate, it rotates because of the torque applied at
the CM, produced by the component of the object’s weight that acts tangent to the motion of the CM. Taking the
counterclockwise direction to be positive, the component of the gravitational force that acts tangent to the motion is
. The minus sign is the result of the restoring force acting in the opposite direction of the increasing angle.
Recall that the torque is equal to . The magnitude of the torque is equal to the length of the radius arm
times the tangential component of the force applied, . Here, the length L of the radius arm is the
distance between the point of rotation and the CM. To analyze the motion, start with the net torque. Like the simple
pendulum, consider only small angles so that . Recall from Fixed-Axis Rotation on rotation that the net
torque is equal to the moment of inertia times the angular acceleration where :
Using the small angle approximation and rearranging:
Once again, the equation says that the second time derivative of the position (in this case, the angle) equals minus a
constant times the position. The solution is
where is the maximum angular displacement. The angular frequency is
15.20
The period is therefore