# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 779-785
############################################################

16.3 • Wave Speed on a Stretched String 767
acting on either side of the mass element is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
If you pluck a string under tension, a transverse wave moves in the positive x-direction, as shown in Figure 16.14.
The mass element is small but is enlarged in the figure to make it visible. The small mass element oscillates
perpendicular to the wave motion as a result of the restoring force provided by the string and does not move in the
x-direction. The tension in the string, which acts in the positive and negative x-direction, is approximately
constant and is independent of position and time.
FIGURE 16.14 A string under tension is plucked, causing a pulse to move along the string in the positive x-direction.
Assume that the inclination of the displaced string with respect to the horizontal axis is small. The net force on the
element of the string, acting parallel to the string, is the sum of the tension in the string and the restoring force. The
x-components of the force of tension cancel, so the net force is equal to the sum of the y-components of the force.
The magnitude of the x-component of the force is equal to the horizontal force of tension of the string as shown
in Figure 16.14. To obtain the y-components of the force, note that and The is
equal to the slope of a function at a point, which is equal to the partial derivative of y with respect to x at that point.
Therefore, is equal to the negative slope of the string at and is equal to the slope of the string at
The net force on the small mass element can be written as
Using Newton’s second law, the net force is equal to the mass times the acceleration. The linear density of the string
is the mass per length of the string, and the mass of the portion of the string is ,
Dividing by and taking the limit as approaches zero,

768 16 • Waves
Recall that the linear wave equation is
Therefore,
Solving for v, we see that the speed of the wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear density.
SPEED OF A WAVE ON A STRING UNDER TENSION
The speed of a pulse or wave on a string under tension can be found with the equation
16.8
where is the tension in the string and is the mass per length of the string.
EXAMPLE 16.5
The Wave Speed of a Guitar String
On a six-string guitar, the high E string has a linear density of and the low E string has
a linear density of (a) If the high E string is plucked, producing a wave in the string,
what is the speed of the wave if the tension of the string is 56.40 N? (b) The linear density of the low E string is
approximately 20 times greater than that of the high E string. For waves to travel through the low E string at the
same wave speed as the high E, would the tension need to be larger or smaller than the high E string? What would
be the approximate tension? (c) Calculate the tension of the low E string needed for the same wave speed.
Strategy
a. The speed of the wave can be found from the linear density and the tension
b. From the equation if the linear density is increased by a factor of almost 20, the tension would
need to be increased by a factor of 20.
c. Knowing the velocity and the linear density, the velocity equation can be solved for the force of tension
Solution
a. Use the velocity equation to find the speed:
b. The tension would need to be increased by a factor of approximately 20. The tension would be slightly less
Access for free at openstax.org

16.4 • Energy and Power of a Wave 769
than 1128 N.
c. Use the velocity equation to find the actual tension:
This solution is within of the approximation.
Significance
The standard notes of the six string (high E, B, G, D, A, low E) are tuned to vibrate at the fundamental frequencies
(329.63 Hz, 246.94Hz, 196.00Hz, 146.83Hz, 110.00Hz, and 82.41Hz) when plucked. The frequencies depend on
the speed of the waves on the string and the wavelength of the waves. The six strings have different linear densities
and are “tuned” by changing the tensions in the strings. We will see in Interference of Waves that the wavelength
depends on the length of the strings and the boundary conditions. To play notes other than the fundamental notes,
the lengths of the strings are changed by pressing down on the strings.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.5
The wave speed of a wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear mass density. If the tension is doubled,
what happens to the speed of the waves on the string?
Speed of Compression Waves in a Fluid
The speed of a wave on a string depends on the square root of the tension divided by the mass per length, the linear
density. In general, the speed of a wave through a medium depends on the elastic property of the medium and the
inertial property of the medium.
The elastic property describes the tendency of the particles of the medium to return to their initial position when
perturbed. The inertial property describes the tendency of the particle to resist changes in velocity.
The speed of a longitudinal wave through a liquid or gas depends on the density of the fluid and the bulk modulus of
the fluid,
16.9
Here the bulk modulus is defined as where is the change in the pressure and the denominator is
the ratio of the change in volume to the initial volume, and is the mass per unit volume. For example, sound
is a mechanical wave that travels through a fluid or a solid. The speed of sound in air with an atmospheric pressure
of and a temperature of is Because the density depends on temperature,
the speed of sound in air depends on the temperature of the air. This will be discussed in detail in Sound.
16.4 Energy and Power of a Wave
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how energy travels with a pulse or wave
• Describe, using a mathematical expression, how the energy in a wave depends on the amplitude of the
wave
All waves carry energy, and sometimes this can be directly observed. Earthquakes can shake whole cities to the
ground, performing the work of thousands of wrecking balls (Figure 16.15). Loud sounds can pulverize nerve cells in
the inner ear, causing permanent hearing loss. Ultrasound is used for deep-heat treatment of muscle strains. A laser

770 16 • Waves
beam can burn away a malignancy. Water waves chew up beaches.
FIGURE 16.15 The destructive effect of an earthquake is observable evidence of the energy carried in these waves. The Richter scale rating
of earthquakes is a logarithmic scale related to both their amplitude and the energy they carry.
In this section, we examine the quantitative expression of energy in waves. This will be of fundamental importance
in later discussions of waves, from sound to light to quantum mechanics.
Energy in Waves
The amount of energy in a wave is related to its amplitude and its frequency. Large-amplitude earthquakes produce
large ground displacements. Loud sounds have high-pressure amplitudes and come from larger-amplitude source
vibrations than soft sounds. Large ocean breakers churn up the shore more than small ones. Consider the example
of the seagull and the water wave earlier in the chapter (Figure 16.3). Work is done on the seagull by the wave as the
seagull is moved up, changing its potential energy. The larger the amplitude, the higher the seagull is lifted by the
wave and the larger the change in potential energy.
The energy of the wave depends on both the amplitude and the frequency. If the energy of each wavelength is
considered to be a discrete packet of energy, a high-frequency wave will deliver more of these packets per unit time
than a low-frequency wave. We will see that the average rate of energy transfer in mechanical waves is proportional
to both the square of the amplitude and the square of the frequency. If two mechanical waves have equal
amplitudes, but one wave has a frequency equal to twice the frequency of the other, the higher-frequency wave will
have a rate of energy transfer a factor of four times as great as the rate of energy transfer of the lower-frequency
wave. It should be noted that although the rate of energy transport is proportional to both the square of the
amplitude and square of the frequency in mechanical waves, the rate of energy transfer in electromagnetic waves is
proportional to the square of the amplitude, but independent of the frequency.
Power in Waves
Consider a sinusoidal wave on a string that is produced by a string vibrator, as shown in Figure 16.16. The string
vibrator is a device that vibrates a rod up and down. A string of uniform linear mass density is attached to the rod,
and the rod oscillates the string, producing a sinusoidal wave. The rod does work on the string, producing energy
that propagates along the string. Consider a mass element of the string with a mass , as seen in Figure 16.16. As
the energy propagates along the string, each mass element of the string is driven up and down at the same
frequency as the wave. Each mass element of the string can be modeled as a simple harmonic oscillator. Since the
string has a constant linear density each mass element of the string has the mass
Access for free at openstax.org

16.4 • Energy and Power of a Wave 771
FIGURE 16.16 A string vibrator is a device that vibrates a rod. A string is attached to the rod, and the rod does work on the string, driving
the string up and down. This produces a sinusoidal wave in the string, which moves with a wave velocity v. The wave speed depends on the
tension in the string and the linear mass density of the string. A section of the string with mass oscillates at the same frequency as the
wave.
The total mechanical energy of the wave is the sum of its kinetic energy and potential energy. The kinetic energy
of each mass element of the string of length is as the mass element oscillates
perpendicular to the direction of the motion of the wave. Using the constant linear mass density, the kinetic energy
of each mass element of the string with length is
A differential equation can be formed by letting the length of the mass element of the string approach zero,
Since the wave is a sinusoidal wave with an angular frequency the position of each mass element may be
modeled as Each mass element of the string oscillates with a velocity
The kinetic energy of each mass element of the string becomes
The wave can be very long, consisting of many wavelengths. To standardize the energy, consider the kinetic energy
associated with a wavelength of the wave. This kinetic energy can be integrated over the wavelength to find the
energy associated with each wavelength of the wave:
There is also potential energy associated with the wave. Much like the mass oscillating on a spring, there is a
conservative restoring force that, when the mass element is displaced from the equilibrium position, drives the
mass element back to the equilibrium position. The potential energy of the mass element can be found by
considering the linear restoring force of the string, In Oscillations, we saw that the potential energy stored in a
spring with a linear restoring force is equal to where the equilibrium position is defined as
When a mass attached to the spring oscillates in simple harmonic motion, the angular frequency is equal to
As each mass element oscillates in simple harmonic motion, the spring constant is equal to
The potential energy of the mass element is equal to
Note that is the spring constant and not the wave number This equation can be used to find the energy
over a wavelength. Integrating over the wavelength, we can compute the potential energy over a wavelength:

772 16 • Waves
The potential energy associated with a wavelength of the wave is equal to the kinetic energy associated with a
wavelength.
The total energy associated with a wavelength is the sum of the potential energy and the kinetic energy:
The time-averaged power of a sinusoidal mechanical wave, which is the average rate of energy transfer associated
with a wave as it passes a point, can be found by taking the total energy associated with the wave divided by the
time it takes to transfer the energy. If the velocity of the sinusoidal wave is constant, the time for one wavelength to
pass by a point is equal to the period of the wave, which is also constant. For a sinusoidal mechanical wave, the
time-averaged power is therefore the energy associated with a wavelength divided by the period of the wave. The
wavelength of the wave divided by the period is equal to the velocity of the wave,
16.10
Note that this equation for the time-averaged power of a sinusoidal mechanical wave shows that the power is
proportional to the square of the amplitude of the wave and to the square of the angular frequency of the wave.
Recall that the angular frequency is equal to , so the power of a mechanical wave is equal to the square of
the amplitude and the square of the frequency of the wave.
EXAMPLE 16.6
Power Supplied by a String Vibrator
Consider a two-meter-long string with a mass of 70.00 g attached to a string vibrator as illustrated in Figure 16.16.
The tension in the string is 90.0 N. When the string vibrator is turned on, it oscillates with a frequency of 60 Hz and
produces a sinusoidal wave on the string with an amplitude of 4.00 cm and a constant wave speed. What is the
time-averaged power supplied to the wave by the string vibrator?
Strategy
The power supplied to the wave should equal the time-averaged power of the wave on the string. We know the mass
of the string , the length of the string , and the tension in the string. The speed of the wave on the
string can be derived from the linear mass density and the tension. The string oscillates with the same frequency as
the string vibrator, from which we can find the angular frequency.
Solution
1. Begin with the equation of the time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave on a string:
The amplitude is given, so we need to calculate the linear mass density of the string, the angular frequency of
the wave on the string, and the speed of the wave on the string.
2. We need to calculate the linear density to find the wave speed:
3. The wave speed can be found using the linear mass density and the tension of the string:
Access for free at openstax.org