# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 599-600
############################################################

12 • Chapter Review 587
Chapter Review
Key Terms
breaking stress (ultimate stress) value of stress at normal pressure pressure of one atmosphere, serves
the fracture point as a reference level for pressure
bulk modulus elastic modulus for the bulk stress pascal (Pa) SI unit of stress, SI unit of pressure
bulk strain (or volume strain) strain under the bulk plastic behavior material deforms irreversibly, does
stress, given as fractional change in volume not go back to its original shape and size when load
bulk stress (or volume stress) stress caused by is removed and stress vanishes
compressive forces, in all directions pressure force pressing in normal direction on a
center of gravity point where the weight vector is surface per the surface area, the bulk stress in fluids
attached second equilibrium condition expresses rotational
compressibility reciprocal of the bulk modulus equilibrium; all torques due to external forces acting
compressive strain strain that occurs when forces on the body balance out and their vector sum is zero
are contracting an object, causing its shortening shear modulus elastic modulus for shear stress
compressive stress stress caused by compressive shear strain strain caused by shear stress
forces, only in one direction shear stress stress caused by shearing forces
elastic object that comes back to its original size and static equilibrium body is in static equilibrium when
shape when the load is no longer present it is at rest in our selected inertial frame of reference
elastic limit stress value beyond which material no strain dimensionless quantity that gives the amount
longer behaves elastically and becomes of deformation of an object or medium under stress
permanently deformed stress quantity that contains information about the
elastic modulus proportionality constant in linear magnitude of force causing deformation, defined as
relation between stress and strain, in SI pascals force per unit area
equilibrium body is in equilibrium when its linear and stress-strain diagram graph showing the relationship
angular accelerations are both zero relative to an between stress and strain, characteristic of a
inertial frame of reference material
first equilibrium condition expresses translational tensile strain strain under tensile stress, given as
equilibrium; all external forces acting on the body fractional change in length, which occurs when
balance out and their vector sum is zero forces are stretching an object, causing its
gravitational torque torque on the body caused by its elongation
weight; it occurs when the center of gravity of the tensile stress stress caused by tensile forces, only in
body is not located on the axis of rotation one direction, which occurs when forces are
linearity limit (proportionality limit) largest stress stretching an object, causing its elongation
value beyond which stress is no longer proportional Young’s modulus elastic modulus for tensile or
to strain compressive stress
Key Equations
First Equilibrium Condition
Second Equilibrium Condition
Linear relation between
stress and strain
Young’s modulus
Bulk modulus
Shear modulus

588 12 • Chapter Review
Summary
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium its deformation, which is a change in its size and
shape. The strength of the forces that cause
• A body is in equilibrium when it remains either in
deformation is expressed by stress, which in SI
uniform motion (both translational and
units is measured in the unit of pressure (pascal).
rotational) or at rest. When a body in a selected
The extent of deformation under stress is
inertial frame of reference neither rotates nor
expressed by strain, which is dimensionless.
moves in translational motion, we say the body is
• For a small stress, the relation between stress
in static equilibrium in this frame of reference.
and strain is linear. The elastic modulus is the
• Conditions for equilibrium require that the sum of
proportionality constant in this linear relation.
all external forces acting on the body is zero (first
• Tensile (or compressive) strain is the response of
condition of equilibrium), and the sum of all
an object or medium to tensile (or compressive)
external torques from external forces is zero
stress. Here, the elastic modulus is called
(second condition of equilibrium). These two
Young’s modulus. Tensile (or compressive) stress
conditions must be simultaneously satisfied in
causes elongation (or shortening) of the object or
equilibrium. If one of them is not satisfied, the
medium and is due to an external forces acting
body is not in equilibrium.
along only one direction perpendicular to the
• The free-body diagram for a body is a useful tool
cross-section.
that allows us to count correctly all contributions
• Bulk strain is the response of an object or
from all external forces and torques acting on the
medium to bulk stress. Here, the elastic modulus
body. Free-body diagrams for the equilibrium of
is called the bulk modulus. Bulk stress causes a
an extended rigid body must indicate a pivot
change in the volume of the object or medium
point and lever arms of acting forces with respect
and is caused by forces acting on the body from
to the pivot.
all directions, perpendicular to its surface.
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium Compressibility of an object or medium is the
reciprocal of its bulk modulus.
• A variety of engineering problems can be solved
• Shear strain is the deformation of an object or
by applying equilibrium conditions for rigid
medium under shear stress. The shear modulus
bodies.
is the elastic modulus in this case. Shear stress is
• In applications, identify all forces that act on a
caused by forces acting along the object’s two
rigid body and note their lever arms in rotation
parallel surfaces.
about a chosen rotation axis. Construct a free-
body diagram for the body. Net external forces 12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
and torques can be clearly identified from a
• An object or material is elastic if it comes back to
correctly constructed free-body diagram. In this
its original shape and size when the stress
way, you can set up the first equilibrium
vanishes. In elastic deformations with stress
condition for forces and the second equilibrium
values lower than the proportionality limit, stress
condition for torques.
is proportional to strain. When stress goes
• In setting up equilibrium conditions, we are free
beyond the proportionality limit, the deformation
to adopt any inertial frame of reference and any
is still elastic but nonlinear up to the elasticity
position of the pivot point. All choices lead to one
limit.
answer. However, some choices can make the
• An object or material has plastic behavior when
process of finding the solution unduly
stress is larger than the elastic limit. In the
complicated. We reach the same answer no
plastic region, the object or material does not
matter what choices we make. The only way to
come back to its original size or shape when
master this skill is to practice.
stress vanishes but acquires a permanent
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus deformation. Plastic behavior ends at the
breaking point.
• External forces on an object (or medium) cause
Access for free at openstax.org