# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 398-406
############################################################

390 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
Figure 8.26 An X-ray image of a piece of luggage. The
denser the material, the darker the shadow. Object colors relate
to material composition—metallic objects show up as blue in
this image. (credit: “IDuke”/Wikimedia Commons)
AstandardX-rayimageprovidesatwo-dimensionalviewoftheobject.However,inmedicalapplications,thisviewdoes
not often provide enough information to draw firm conclusions. For example, in a two-dimensional X-ray image of the
body,bonescaneasilyhidesofttissuesororgans.TheCAT(computedaxialtomography)scanneraddressesthisproblem
bycollectingnumerousX-rayimagesin“slices”throughoutthebody.Complexcomputer-imageprocessingoftherelative
absorption of the X-rays, in different directions, can produce a highly detailed three-dimensional X-ray image of the body.
X-rays can also be used to probe the structures of atoms and molecules. Consider X-rays incident on the surface of a
crystalline solid. Some X-ray photons reflect at the surface, and others reflect off the “plane” of atoms just below the
surface. Interference between these photons, for different angles of incidence, produces a beautiful image on a screen
(Figure 8.27).Theinteraction ofX-rayswithasolidiscalledX-raydiffraction.ThemostfamousexampleusingX-ray
diffraction is the discovery of the double-helix structure of DNA.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 391
Figure 8.27 X-ray diffraction from the crystal of a protein (hen egg lysozyme) produced this
interference pattern. Analysis of the pattern yields information about the structure of the protein.
(credit: “Del45”/Wikimedia Commons)
8.6 | Lasers
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physical processes necessary to produce laser light
• Explain the difference between coherent and incoherent light
• Describe the application of lasers to a CD and Blu-Ray player
Alaserisdevicethatemitscoherentandmonochromaticlight.Thelightiscoherentifphotonsthatcomposethelightare
in-phase, and monochromatic if the photons have a single frequency (color). When a gas in the laser absorbs radiation,
electronsareelevatedtodifferentenergylevels.Mostelectronsreturnimmediatelytothegroundstate,butotherslingerin
whatiscalledametastablestate.Itispossibletoplaceamajorityoftheseatomsinametastablestate,aconditioncalleda
population inversion.
Whenaphotonofenergydisturbsanelectroninametastablestate(Figure 8.28),theelectrondropstothelower-energy
levelandemitsanadditionphoton,andthetwophotonsproceedofftogether.Thisprocessiscalledstimulatedemission.It
occurswithrelativelyhighprobabilitywhentheenergyoftheincomingphotonisequaltotheenergydifferencebetweenthe
excitedand“de-excited”energylevelsoftheelectron(ΔE=hf ).Hence,theincomingphotonandthephotonproduced
byde-excitationhavethesameenergy,hf.Thesephotonsencountermoreelectronsinthemetastablestate,andtheprocess
repeats.Theresultisacascadeorchainreactionofsimilarde-excitations.Laserlightiscoherentbecausealllightwavesin
laserlightsharethesamefrequency(color)andthesamephase(anytwopointsofalongalineperpendiculartothedirection

392 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
ofmotionareonthe“samepart”ofthewave”).Aschematicdiagramofcoherentandincoherentlightwavepatternisgiven
inFigure 8.29.
Figure 8.28 The physics of a laser. An incident photon of frequencyfcauses a cascade of
photons of the same frequency.
Figure 8.29 A coherent light wave pattern contains light waves of the same
frequency and phase. An incoherent light wave pattern contains light waves of
different frequencies and phases.
Lasersareusedinawiderangeofapplications,suchasincommunication(opticalfiberphonelines),entertainment(laser
lightshows),medicine(removingtumorsandcauterizingvesselsintheretina),andinretailsales(barcodereaders).Lasers
can also be produced by a large range of materials, including solids (for example, the ruby crystal), gases (helium-gas
mixture),andliquids(organicdyes).Recently,alaserwasevencreatedusinggelatin—anediblelaser!Belowwediscuss
two practical applications in detail: CD players and Blu-Ray Players.
CD Player
ACDplayerreadsdigitalinformationstoredonacompactdisc(CD).ACDis6-inchdiameter discmadeofplasticthat
contains small “bumps” and “pits” nears its surface to encode digital or binary data (Figure 8.30). The bumps and pits
appearalongaverythintrackthatspiralsoutwardsfromthecenterofthedisc.Thewidthofthetrackissmallerthan1/20th
the width of a human hair, and the heights of the bumps are even smaller yet.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 393
Figure 8.30 A compact disc is a plastic disc that uses bumps near
its surface to encode digital information. The surface of the disc
contains multiple layers, including a layer of aluminum and one of
polycarbonate plastic.
ACDplayerusesalasertoreadthisdigital information. Laserlightissuitedtothispurpose,becausecoherentlightcan
be focused onto an incredibly small spot and therefore distinguish between bumps and pits in the CD. After processing
byplayer components (including adiffraction grating, polarizer,andcollimator), laser light isfocusedbyalensontothe
CDsurface.Lightthatstrikesabump(“land”)ismerelyreflected,butlightthatstrikesa“pit”destructivelyinterferes,so
nolightreturns(thedetailsofthisprocessarenotimportanttothisdiscussion).Reflectedlightisinterpretedasa“1”and
unreflectedlightisinterpretedasa“0.”Theresultingdigitalsignalisconvertedintoananalogsignal,andtheanalogsignal
is fed into an amplifier that powers a device such as a pair of headphones. The laser system of a CD player is shown in
Figure 8.31.
Figure 8.31 A CD player and its laser component.
Blu-Ray Player
LikeaCDplayer,aBlu-Rayplayerreadsdigitalinformation(videooraudio)storedonadisc,andalaserisusedtorecord
thisinformation.ThepitsonaBlu-RaydiscaremuchsmallerandmorecloselypackedtogetherthanforaCD,somuch
moreinformationcanbestored.Asaresult,theresolvingpowerofthelasermustbegreater.Thisisachievedusingshort
wavelength (λ=405nm) bluelaserlight—hence,thename“Blu-”Ray.(CDsandDVDsuseredlaserlight.)Thedifferent
pitsizesandplayer-hardwareconfigurationsofaCD,DVD,andBlu-RayplayerareshowninFigure 8.32.Thepitsizes
of a Blu-Ray disk are more than twice as small as the pits on a DVD or CD. Unlike a CD, a Blu-Ray disc store data on
apolycarbonatelayer,whichplacesthedataclosertothelensandavoidsreadabilityproblems.Ahardcoatingisusedto
protect the data since it is so close to the surface.

394 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
Figure 8.32 Comparison of laser resolution in a CD, DVD, and Blu-Ray Player.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 395
CHAPTER 8 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
angular momentum orbital quantum number (l) quantumnumberassociatedwiththeorbitalangularmomentum
of an electron in a hydrogen atom
angular momentum projection quantum number (m) quantum number associated with the z-component of the
orbital angular momentum of an electron in a hydrogen atom
atomic orbital region in space that encloses a certain percentage (usually 90%) of the electron probability
Bohr magneton magnetic moment of an electron, equal to 9.3×10−24J/T or 5.8×10 −5 eV/T
braking radiation radiationproducedbytargetingmetalwithahigh-energyelectronbeam(orradiationproducedbythe
acceleration of any charged particle in a material)
chemical group group of elements in the same column of the periodic table that possess similar chemical properties
coherent light light that consists of photons of the same frequency and phase
covalent bond chemical bond formed by the sharing of electrons between two atoms
electron configuration representation of the state of electrons in an atom, such as 1s22s1 for lithium
fine structure detailed structure of atomic spectra produced by spin-orbit coupling
fluorescence radiation produced by the excitation and subsequent, gradual de-excitation of an electron in an atom
hyperfine structure detailed structure of atomic spectra produced by spin-orbit coupling
ionic bond chemical bond formed by the electric attraction between two oppositely charged ions
laser coherent light produced by a cascade of electron de-excitations
magnetic orbital quantum number another term for the angular momentum projection quantum number
magnetogram pictoral representation, or map, of the magnetic activity at the Sun’s surface
metastable state state in which an electron “lingers” in an excited state
monochromatic light that consists of photons with the same frequency
Moseley plot plot of the atomic number versus the square root of X-ray frequency
Moseley’s law relationship between the atomic number and X-ray photon frequency for X-ray production
orbital magnetic dipole moment measure of the strength of the magnetic field produced by the orbital angular
momentum of the electron
Pauli’s exclusion principle no two electrons in an atom can have the same values for all four quantum numbers
(n, l, m, m s)
population inversion condition in which a majority of atoms contain electrons in a metastable state
principal quantum number (n) quantum number associated with the total energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom
radial probability density function function use to determine the probability of a electron to be found in a spatial
interval inr
selection rules rules that determine whether atomic transitions are allowed or forbidden (rare)
spin projection quantum number (m ) quantum number associated with the z-component of the spin angular
s
momentum of an electron
spin quantum number (s) quantum number associated with the spin angular momentum of an electron
spin-flip transitions atomictransitionsbetweenstatesofanelectron-protonsysteminwhichthemagneticmomentsare
aligned and not aligned
spin-orbit coupling interactionbetweentheelectronmagneticmomentandthemagneticfieldproducedbytheorbital

396 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
angular momentum of the electron
stimulated emission whenaphotonofenergytriggersanelectroninametastablestatetodropinenergyemittingan
additional photon
transition metal elementthatislocatedinthegapbetweenthefirsttwocolumnsandthelastsixcolumnsofthetableof
elements that contains electrons that fill thedsubshell
valence electron electron in the outer shell of an atom that participates in chemical bonding
Zeeman effect splitting of energy levels by an external magnetic field
KEY EQUATIONS
Orbital angular momentum L= l(l+1)ℏ
z-component of orbital angular momentum L z=mℏ
2
Radial probability density function P(r)dr =|ψ
n00
| 4πr2dr
Spin angular momentum S= s(s+1)ℏ
z-component of spin angular momentum S z=m sℏ
→ ⎛ e ⎞→
Electron spin magnetic moment µ s= ⎝m e⎠ S
→ ⎛ e ⎞→
Electron orbital magnetic dipole moment µ =− L
⎝2m
e
⎠
Potential energy associated with the magnetic
interaction between the orbital magnetic dipole U(θ)=−µ
z
B=mµ
B
B
→
moment and an external magnetic field B
Maximum number of electrons in a subshell of
N =4l+2
a hydrogen atom
Selection rule for atomic transitions in a
Δl= ±1
hydrogen-like atom
Moseley’s law for X-ray production (Z−1)=constant f
SUMMARY
8.1The Hydrogen Atom
• Ahydrogenatomcanbedescribedintermsofitswavefunction,probabilitydensity,totalenergy,andorbitalangular
momentum.
• The state of an electron in a hydrogen atom is specified by its quantum numbers (n,l,m).
• IncontrasttotheBohrmodeloftheatom,theSchrödingermodelmakespredictionsbasedonprobabilitystatements.
• The quantum numbers of a hydrogen atom can be used to calculate important information about the atom.
8.2Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
• A hydrogen atom has magnetic properties because the motion of the electron acts as a current loop.
• Theenergylevelsofahydrogenatomassociatedwithorbitalangularmomentumaresplitbyanexternalmagnetic
field because the orbital angular magnetic moment interacts with the field.
• Thequantumnumbersofanelectroninahydrogenatomcanbeusedtocalculatethemagnitudeanddirectionofthe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 397
orbital magnetic dipole moment of the atom.
8.3Electron Spin
• The state of an electron in a hydrogen atom can be expressed in terms of five quantum numbers.
• Thespinangularmomentumquantumofanelectronis= +½.Thespinangularmomentumprojectionquantum
number ism s = +½or −½ (spin up or spin down).
• Thefineandhyperfinestructuresofthehydrogenspectrumareexplainedbymagneticinteractionswithintheatom.
8.4The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
• Pauli’s exclusion principle states that no two electrons in an atom can have all the same quantum numbers.
• The structure of the periodic table of elements can be explained in terms of the total energy, orbital angular
momentum, and spin of electrons in an atom.
• Thestateofanatomcanbeexpressedbyitselectronconfiguration,whichdescribestheshellsandsubshellsthatare
filled in the atom.
8.5Atomic Spectra and X-rays
• Radiation is absorbed and emitted by atomic energy-level transitions.
• Quantumnumberscanbeusedtoestimatetheenergy,frequency,andwavelengthofphotonsproducedbyatomic
transitions.
• Atomic fluorescence occurs when an electron in an atom is excited several steps above the ground state by the
absorption of a high-energy ultraviolet (UV) photon.
• X-rayphotonsareproducedwhenavacancyinaninnershellofanatomisfilledbyanelectronfromtheoutershell
of the atom.
• The frequency of X-ray radiation is related to the atomic numberZof an atom.
8.6Lasers
• Laser light is coherent (monochromatic and “phase linked”) light.
• Laserlightisproducedbypopulationinversionandsubsequentde-excitationofelectronsinamaterial(solid,liquid,
or gas).
• CD and Blu-Ray players uses lasers to read digital information stored on discs.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
split by an external magnetic field. What determines the
8.1The Hydrogen Atom number and spacing of these lines?
1. Identify the physical significance of each of the
quantum numbers of the hydrogen atom. 5. Ahydrogenatomisplacedinamagneticfield.Which
of the following quantities are affected? (a) total energy;
(b) angular momentum; (c) z-component of angular
2. Describethegroundstateofhydrogenintermsofwave
momentum; (d) polar angle.
function, probability density, and atomic orbitals.
6. On what factors does the orbital magnetic dipole
3. Distinguish between Bohr’s and Schrödinger’s model
moment of an electron depend?
ofthehydrogenatom.Inparticular,comparetheenergyand
orbital angular momentum of the ground states.
8.3Electron Spin
8.2Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the 7. Explain how a hydrogen atom in the ground state
Electron
(l=0) can interact magnetically with an external
magnetic field.
4. Explain why spectral lines of the hydrogen atom are