# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 294-300
############################################################

282 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
example, on a merry-go-round or on a rotating planet. Noninertial (accelerated) frames of reference are used when
it is useful to do so. Different frames of reference must be considered in discussing the motion of an astronaut in a
spacecraft traveling at speeds near the speed of light, as you will appreciate in the study of the special theory of
relativity.
Let us now take a mental ride on a merry-go-round—specifically, a rapidly rotating playground merry-go-round
(Figure 6.25). You take the merry-go-round to be your frame of reference because you rotate together. When
rotating in that noninertial frame of reference, you feel an inertial force that tends to throw you off; this is often
referred to as a centrifugal force (not to be confused with centripetal force). Centrifugal force is a commonly used
term, but it does not actually exist. You must hang on tightly to counteract your inertia (which people often refer to
as centrifugal force). In Earth’s frame of reference, there is no force trying to throw you off; we emphasize that
centrifugal force is a fiction. You must hang on to make yourself go in a circle because otherwise you would go in a
straight line, right off the merry-go-round, in keeping with Newton’s first law. But the force you exert acts toward the
center of the circle.
FIGURE 6.25 (a) A rider on a merry-go-round feels as if he is being thrown off. This inertial force is sometimes mistakenly called the
centrifugal force in an effort to explain the rider’s motion in the rotating frame of reference. (b) In an inertial frame of reference and
according to Newton’s laws, it is his inertia that carries him off (the unshaded rider has and heads in a straight line). A force,
, is needed to cause a circular path.
This inertial effect, carrying you away from the center of rotation if there is no centripetal force to cause circular
motion, is put to good use in centrifuges (Figure 6.26). A centrifuge spins a sample very rapidly, as mentioned earlier
in this chapter. Viewed from the rotating frame of reference, the inertial force throws particles outward, hastening
their sedimentation. The greater the angular velocity, the greater the centrifugal force. But what really happens is
that the inertia of the particles carries them along a line tangent to the circle while the test tube is forced in a
circular path by a centripetal force.
Access for free at openstax.org

6.3 • Centripetal Force 283
FIGURE 6.26 Centrifuges use inertia to perform their task. Particles in the fluid sediment settle out because their inertia carries them away
from the center of rotation. The large angular velocity of the centrifuge quickens the sedimentation. Ultimately, the particles come into
contact with the test tube walls, which then supply the centripetal force needed to make them move in a circle of constant radius.
Let us now consider what happens if something moves in a rotating frame of reference. For example, what if you
slide a ball directly away from the center of the merry-go-round, as shown in Figure 6.27? The ball follows a straight
path relative to Earth (assuming negligible friction) and a path curved to the right on the merry-go-round’s surface. A
person standing next to the merry-go-round sees the ball moving straight and the merry-go-round rotating
underneath it. In the merry-go-round’s frame of reference, we explain the apparent curve to the right by using an
inertial force, called the Coriolis force, which causes the ball to curve to the right. The Coriolis force can be used by
anyone in that frame of reference to explain why objects follow curved paths and allows us to apply Newton’s laws
in noninertial frames of reference.
FIGURE 6.27 Looking down on the counterclockwise rotation of a merry-go-round, we see that a ball slid straight toward the edge follows a
path curved to the right. The person slides the ball toward point B, starting at point A. Both points rotate to the shaded positions (A’ and B’)
shown in the time that the ball follows the curved path in the rotating frame and a straight path in Earth’s frame.
Up until now, we have considered Earth to be an inertial frame of reference with little or no worry about effects due
to its rotation. Yet such effects do exist—in the rotation of weather systems, for example. Most consequences of
Earth’s rotation can be qualitatively understood by analogy with the merry-go-round. Viewed from above the North
Pole, Earth rotates counterclockwise, as does the merry-go-round in Figure 6.27. As on the merry-go-round, any
motion in Earth’s Northern Hemisphere experiences a Coriolis force to the right. Just the opposite occurs in the
Southern Hemisphere; there, the force is to the left. Because Earth’s angular velocity is small, the Coriolis force is
usually negligible, but for large-scale motions, such as wind patterns, it has substantial effects.

284 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
The Coriolis force causes hurricanes in the Northern Hemisphere to rotate in the counterclockwise direction,
whereas tropical cyclones in the Southern Hemisphere rotate in the clockwise direction. (The terms hurricane,
typhoon, and tropical storm are regionally specific names for cyclones, which are storm systems characterized by
low pressure centers, strong winds, and heavy rains.) Figure 6.28 helps show how these rotations take place. Air
flows toward any region of low pressure, and tropical cyclones contain particularly low pressures. Thus winds flow
toward the center of a tropical cyclone or a low-pressure weather system at the surface. In the Northern
Hemisphere, these inward winds are deflected to the right, as shown in the figure, producing a counterclockwise
circulation at the surface for low-pressure zones of any type. Low pressure at the surface is associated with rising
air, which also produces cooling and cloud formation, making low-pressure patterns quite visible from space.
Conversely, wind circulation around high-pressure zones is clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere but is less visible
because high pressure is associated with sinking air, producing clear skies.
FIGURE 6.28 (a) The counterclockwise rotation of this Northern Hemisphere hurricane is a major consequence of the Coriolis force. (b)
Without the Coriolis force, air would flow straight into a low-pressure zone, such as that found in tropical cyclones. (c) The Coriolis force
deflects the winds to the right, producing a counterclockwise rotation. (d) Wind flowing away from a high-pressure zone is also deflected to
the right, producing a clockwise rotation. (e) The opposite direction of rotation is produced by the Coriolis force in the Southern
Hemisphere, leading to tropical cyclones. (credit a and credit e: modifications of work by NASA)
The rotation of tropical cyclones and the path of a ball on a merry-go-round can just as well be explained by inertia
and the rotation of the system underneath. When noninertial frames are used, inertial forces, such as the Coriolis
force, must be invented to explain the curved path. There is no identifiable physical source for these inertial forces.
In an inertial frame, inertia explains the path, and no force is found to be without an identifiable source. Either view
allows us to describe nature, but a view in an inertial frame is the simplest in the sense that all forces have origins
and explanations.
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express the drag force mathematically
• Describe applications of the drag force
• Define terminal velocity
• Determine an object’s terminal velocity given its mass
Another interesting force in everyday life is the force of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid (either a gas or
a liquid). You feel the drag force when you move your hand through water. You might also feel it if you move your
Access for free at openstax.org

6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 285
hand during a strong wind. The faster you move your hand, the harder it is to move. You feel a smaller drag force
when you tilt your hand so only the side goes through the air—you have decreased the area of your hand that faces
the direction of motion.
Drag Forces
Like friction, the drag force always opposes the motion of an object. Unlike simple friction, the drag force is
proportional to some function of the velocity of the object in that fluid. This functionality is complicated and
depends upon the shape of the object, its size, its velocity, and the fluid it is in. For most large objects such as
cyclists, cars, and baseballs not moving too slowly, the magnitude of the drag force is proportional to the square
of the speed of the object. We can write this relationship mathematically as When taking into account
other factors, this relationship becomes
6.5
where C is the drag coefficient, A is the area of the object facing the fluid, and is the density of the fluid. (Recall
that density is mass per unit volume.) This equation can also be written in a more generalized fashion as
where b is a constant equivalent to We have set the exponent n for these equations as 2 because when an
object is moving at high velocity through air, the magnitude of the drag force is proportional to the square of the
speed. As we shall see in Fluid Mechanics, for small particles moving at low speeds in a fluid, the exponent n is
equal to 1.
DRAG FORCE
Drag force is proportional to the square of the speed of the object. Mathematically,
where C is the drag coefficient, A is the area of the object facing the fluid, and is the density of the fluid.
Athletes as well as car designers seek to reduce the drag force to lower their race times (Figure 6.29). Aerodynamic
shaping of an automobile can reduce the drag force and thus increase a car’s gas mileage.
FIGURE 6.29 From racing cars to bobsled racers, aerodynamic shaping is crucial to achieving top speeds. Bobsleds are designed for speed
and are shaped like a bullet with tapered fins. (credit: “U.S. Army”/Wikimedia Commons)
The value of the drag coefficient C is determined empirically, usually with the use of a wind tunnel (Figure 6.30).

286 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.30 NASA researchers test a model plane in a wind tunnel. (credit: NASA/Ames)
The drag coefficient can depend upon velocity, but we assume that it is a constant here. Table 6.2 lists some typical
drag coefficients for a variety of objects. Notice that the drag coefficient is a dimensionless quantity. At highway
speeds, over of the power of a car is used to overcome air drag. The most fuel-efficient cruising speed is about
70–80 km/h (about 45–50 mi/h). For this reason, during the 1970s oil crisis in the United States, maximum speeds
on highways were set at about 90 km/h (55 mi/h).
Object C
Airfoil 0.05
Toyota Camry 0.28
Ford Focus 0.32
Honda Civic 0.36
Ferrari Testarossa 0.37
Dodge Ram Pickup 0.43
Sphere 0.45
Hummer H2 SUV 0.64
Skydiver (feet first) 0.70
TABLE 6.2 Typical Values of Drag
Coefficient C
Access for free at openstax.org

6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 287
Object C
Bicycle 0.90
Skydiver (horizontal) 1.0
Circular flat plate 1.12
TABLE 6.2 Typical Values of Drag
Coefficient C
Substantial research is under way in the sporting world to minimize drag. The dimples on golf balls are being
redesigned, as are the clothes that athletes wear. Bicycle racers and some swimmers and runners wear full
bodysuits. Australian Cathy Freeman wore a full body suit in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and won a gold medal in the
400-m race. Many swimmers in the 2008 Beijing Olympics wore (Speedo) body suits; it might have made a
difference in breaking many world records (Figure 6.31). Most elite swimmers (and cyclists) shave their body hair.
Such innovations can have the effect of slicing away milliseconds in a race, sometimes making the difference
between a gold and a silver medal. One consequence is that careful and precise guidelines must be continuously
developed to maintain the integrity of the sport.
FIGURE 6.31 Body suits, such as this LZR Racer Suit, have been credited with aiding in many world records after their release in 2008.
Smoother “skin” and more compression forces on a swimmer’s body provide at least less drag. (credit: NASA/Kathy Barnstorff)
Terminal Velocity
Some interesting situations connected to Newton’s second law occur when considering the effects of drag forces
upon a moving object. For instance, consider a skydiver falling through air under the influence of gravity. The two
forces acting on him are the force of gravity and the drag force (ignoring the small buoyant force). The downward
force of gravity remains constant regardless of the velocity at which the person is moving. However, as the person’s
velocity increases, the magnitude of the drag force increases until the magnitude of the drag force is equal to the
gravitational force, thus producing a net force of zero. A zero net force means that there is no acceleration, as shown
by Newton’s second law. At this point, the person’s velocity remains constant and we say that the person has
reached his terminal velocity Since is proportional to the speed squared, a heavier skydiver must go
faster for to equal his weight. Let’s see how this works out more quantitatively.
At the terminal velocity,
Thus,