# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 710-714
############################################################

698 14 • Chapter Review
Conceptual Questions
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure leak outside a river levee can effectively stop the
flow of water under the levee. Explain how the small
1 . Which of the following substances are fluids at
amount of water inside the column of sandbags is
room temperature and atmospheric pressure:
able to balance the much larger body of water
air, mercury, water, glass?
behind the levee.
2 . Why are gases easier to compress than liquids
and solids?
3 . Explain how the density of air varies with
altitude.
4 . The image shows a glass of ice water filled to the
brim. Will the water overflow when the ice
melts? Explain your answer.
12 . Is there a net force on a dam due to atmospheric
pressure? Explain your answer.
13 . Does atmospheric pressure add to the gas
pressure in a rigid tank? In a toy balloon? When,
in general, does atmospheric pressure not affect
the total pressure in a fluid?
14 . You can break a strong wine bottle by pounding
a cork into it with your fist, but the cork must
press directly against the liquid filling the
5 . How is pressure related to the sharpness of a
bottle—there can be no air between the cork and
knife and its ability to cut?
liquid. Explain why the bottle breaks only if there
6 . Why is a force exerted by a static fluid on a is no air between the cork and liquid.
surface always perpendicular to the surface?
14.2 Measuring Pressure
7 . Imagine that in a remote location near the North
15 . Explain why the fluid reaches equal levels on
Pole, a chunk of ice floats in a lake. Next to the
either side of a manometer if both sides are
lake, a glacier with the same volume as the
open to the atmosphere, even if the tubes are of
floating ice sits on land. If both chunks of ice
different diameters.
should melt due to rising global temperatures,
and the melted ice all goes into the lake, which
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
one would cause the level of the lake to rise the
most? Explain. 16 . Suppose the master cylinder in a hydraulic
system is at a greater height than the cylinder it
8 . In ballet, dancing en pointe (on the tips of the
is controlling. Explain how this will affect the
toes) is much harder on the toes than normal
force produced at the cylinder that is being
dancing or walking. Explain why, in terms of
controlled.
pressure.
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
9 . Atmospheric pressure exerts a large force (equal
to the weight of the atmosphere above your 17 . More force is required to pull the plug in a full
body—about 10 tons) on the top of your body bathtub than when it is empty. Does this
when you are lying on the beach sunbathing. contradict Pascal’s principle? Explain your
Why are you able to get up? answer.
10 . Why does atmospheric pressure decrease more 18 . Do fluids exert buoyant forces in a “weightless”
rapidly than linearly with altitude? environment, such as in the space shuttle?
Explain your answer.
11 . The image shows how sandbags placed around a
Access for free at openstax.org

14 • Chapter Review 699
19 . Will the same ship float higher in salt water than 28 . Why is it preferable for airplanes to take off into
in freshwater? Explain your answer. the wind rather than with the wind?
20 . Marbles dropped into a partially filled bathtub 29 . Roofs are sometimes pushed off vertically during
sink to the bottom. Part of their weight is a tropical cyclone, and buildings sometimes
supported by buoyant force, yet the downward explode outward when hit by a tornado. Use
force on the bottom of the tub increases by Bernoulli’s principle to explain these
exactly the weight of the marbles. Explain why. phenomena.
14.5 Fluid Dynamics 30 . It is dangerous to stand close to railroad tracks
when a rapidly moving commuter train passes.
21 . Many figures in the text show streamlines.
Explain why atmospheric pressure would push
Explain why fluid velocity is greatest where
you toward the moving train.
streamlines are closest together. (Hint: Consider
the relationship between fluid velocity and the 31 . Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less
cross-sectional area through which the fluid than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli
flows.) effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water
can emerge from the nozzle against the
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
opposing atmospheric pressure.
22 . You can squirt water from a garden hose a
32 . David rolled down the window on his car while
considerably greater distance by partially
driving on the freeway. An empty plastic bag on
covering the opening with your thumb. Explain
the floor promptly flew out the window. Explain
how this works.
why.
23 . Water is shot nearly vertically upward in a
33 . Based on Bernoulli’s equation, what are three
decorative fountain and the stream is observed
forms of energy in a fluid? (Note that these
to broaden as it rises. Conversely, a stream of
forms are conservative, unlike heat transfer and
water falling straight down from a faucet
other dissipative forms not included in
narrows. Explain why.
Bernoulli’s equation.)
24 . Look back to Figure 14.29. Answer the following
34 . The old rubber boot shown below has two leaks. To
two questions. Why is less than atmospheric?
what maximum height can the water squirt from
Why is greater than ?
Leak 1? How does the velocity of water emerging
25 . A tube with a narrow segment designed to from Leak 2 differ from that of Leak 1? Explain your
enhance entrainment is called a Venturi, such as responses in terms of energy.
shown below. Venturis are very commonly used
in carburetors and aspirators. How does this
structure bolster entrainment?
26 . Some chimney pipes have a T-shape, with a
35 . Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less
crosspiece on top that helps draw up gases
than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli
whenever there is even a slight breeze. Explain
effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water
how this works in terms of Bernoulli’s principle.
can emerge from the nozzle against the
27 . Is there a limit to the height to which an opposing atmospheric pressure.
entrainment device can raise a fluid? Explain
your answer.

700 14 • Chapter Review
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence 39 . Doppler ultrasound can be used to measure the
speed of blood in the body. If there is a partial
36 . Explain why the viscosity of a liquid decreases
constriction of an artery, where would you
with temperature, that is, how might an increase
expect blood speed to be greatest: at or after
in temperature reduce the effects of cohesive
the constriction? What are the two distinct
forces in a liquid? Also explain why the viscosity
causes of higher resistance in the constriction?
of a gas increases with temperature, that is, how
does increased gas temperature create more 40 . Sink drains often have a device such as that shown
collisions between atoms and molecules? below to help speed the flow of water. How does
this work?
37 . When paddling a canoe upstream, it is wisest to
travel as near to the shore as possible. When
canoeing downstream, it is generally better to
stay near the middle. Explain why.
38 . Plumbing usually includes air-filled tubes near water
faucets (see the following figure). Explain why they
are needed and how they work.
Problems
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure Archimedes’ principle.)
41 . Gold is sold by the troy ounce (31.103 g). What 45 . Suppose you have a coffee mug with a circular
is the volume of 1 troy ounce of pure gold? cross-section and vertical sides (uniform radius).
What is its inside radius if it holds 375 g of
42 . Mercury is commonly supplied in flasks
coffee when filled to a depth of 7.50 cm?
containing 34.5 kg (about 76 lb.). What is the
Assume coffee has the same density as water.
volume in liters of this much mercury?
46 . A rectangular gasoline tank can hold 50.0 kg of
43 . What is the mass of a deep breath of air having a
gasoline when full. What is the depth of the tank
volume of 2.00 L? Discuss the effect taking such
if it is 0.500-m wide by 0.900-m long? (b)
a breath has on your body’s volume and density.
Discuss whether this gas tank has a reasonable
44 . A straightforward method of finding the density volume for a passenger car.
of an object is to measure its mass and then
47 . A trash compactor can compress its contents to
measure its volume by submerging it in a
0.350 times their original volume. Neglecting the
graduated cylinder. What is the density of a
mass of air expelled, by what factor is the
240-g rock that displaces of water?
density of the rubbish increased?
(Note that the accuracy and practical
applications of this technique are more limited 48 . A 2.50-kg steel gasoline can holds 20.0 L of
than a variety of others that are based on gasoline when full. What is the average density
of the full gas can, taking into account the
Access for free at openstax.org

14 • Chapter Review 701
volume occupied by steel as well as by gasoline? balloon uses water and the manometer
connected to the jar contains mercury. Express
49 . What is the density of 18.0-karat gold that is a
in units of centimeters of water for the balloon
mixture of 18 parts gold, 5 parts silver, and 1
and millimeters of mercury for the jar, taking
part copper? (These values are parts by mass,
for each.
not volume.) Assume that this is a simple
mixture having an average density equal to the 57 . How tall must a water-filled manometer be to
weighted densities of its constituents. measure blood pressure as high as 300 mm Hg?
50 . The tip of a nail exerts tremendous pressure 58 . Assuming bicycle tires are perfectly flexible and
when hit by a hammer because it exerts a large support the weight of bicycle and rider by
force over a small area. What force must be pressure alone, calculate the total area of the
exerted on a nail with a circular tip of 1.00-mm tires in contact with the ground if a bicycle and
diameter to create a pressure of rider have a total mass of 80.0 kg, and the gauge
(This high pressure is pressure in the tires is .
possible because the hammer striking the nail is
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
brought to rest in such a short distance.)
59 . How much pressure is transmitted in the
51 . A glass tube contains mercury. What would be
hydraulic system considered in Example 14.3?
the height of the column of mercury which
Express your answer in atmospheres.
would create pressure equal to 1.00 atm?
60 . What force must be exerted on the master
52 . The greatest ocean depths on Earth are found in
cylinder of a hydraulic lift to support the weight
the Marianas Trench near the Philippines.
of a 2000-kg car (a large car) resting on a second
Calculate the pressure due to the ocean at the
cylinder? The master cylinder has a 2.00-cm
bottom of this trench, given its depth is 11.0 km
diameter and the second cylinder has a 24.0-cm
and assuming the density of seawater is
diameter.
constant all the way down.
61 . A host pours the remnants of several bottles of
53 . Verify that the SI unit of is .
wine into a jug after a party. The host then
54 . What pressure is exerted on the bottom of a gas inserts a cork with a 2.00-cm diameter into the
tank that is 0.500-m wide and 0.900-m long and bottle, placing it in direct contact with the wine.
can hold 50.0 kg of gasoline when full? The host is amazed when the host pounds the
cork into place and the bottom of the jug (with a
55 . A dam is used to hold back a river. The dam has a
14.0-cm diameter) breaks away. Calculate the
height and a width Assume
extra force exerted against the bottom if he
that the density of the water is (a)
pounded the cork with a 120-N force.
Determine the net force on the dam. (b) Why does
the thickness of the dam increase with depth? 62 . A certain hydraulic system is designed to exert a
force 100 times as large as the one put into it.
(a) What must be the ratio of the area of the
cylinder that is being controlled to the area of
the master cylinder? (b) What must be the ratio
of their diameters? (c) By what factor is the
distance through which the output force moves
reduced relative to the distance through which
the input force moves? Assume no losses due to
friction.
63 . Verify that work input equals work output for a
hydraulic system assuming no losses due to
friction. Do this by showing that the distance the
14.2 Measuring Pressure
output force moves is reduced by the same
56 . Find the gauge and absolute pressures in the factor that the output force is increased. Assume
balloon and peanut jar shown in Figure 14.12, the volume of the fluid is constant. What effect
assuming the manometer connected to the would friction within the fluid and between