# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 523-529
############################################################

10 • Chapter Review 511
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion inertia of the propeller? (b) What power is being
provided to the propeller 3.0 s after it starts
97 . A wind turbine rotates at 20 rev/min. If its power
rotating?
output is 2.0 MW, what is the torque produced
on the turbine from the wind? 102 . A sphere of mass 1.0 kg and radius 0.5 m is
attached to the end of a massless rod of length
98 . A clay cylinder of radius 20 cm on a potter’s
3.0 m. The rod rotates about an axis that is at
wheel spins at a constant rate of 10 rev/s. The
the opposite end of the sphere (see below). The
potter applies a force of 10 N to the clay with his
system rotates horizontally about the axis at a
hands where the coefficient of friction is 0.1
constant 400 rev/min. After rotating at this
between his hands and the clay. What is the
angular speed in a vacuum, air resistance is
power that the potter has to deliver to the wheel
introduced and provides a force on the
to keep it rotating at this constant rate?
sphere opposite to the direction of motion. What
99 . A uniform cylindrical grindstone has a mass of is the power provided by air resistance to the
10 kg and a radius of 12 cm. (a) What is the system 100.0 s after air resistance is
rotational kinetic energy of the grindstone when introduced?
it is rotating at (b) After the
grindstone’s motor is turned off, a knife blade is
pressed against the outer edge of the grindstone
with a perpendicular force of 5.0 N. The
coefficient of kinetic friction between the
grindstone and the blade is 0.80. Use the work
energy theorem to determine how many turns
the grindstone makes before it stops.
103 . A uniform rod of length L and mass M is held
100 . A uniform disk of mass 500 kg and radius 0.25 m
vertically with one end resting on the floor as
is mounted on frictionless bearings so it can
shown below. When the rod is released, it rotates
rotate freely around a vertical axis through its
around its lower end until it hits the floor.
center (see the following figure). A cord is
Assuming the lower end of the rod does not slip,
wrapped around the rim of the disk and pulled
what is the linear velocity of the upper end when it
with a force of 10 N. (a) How much work has the
hits the floor?
force done at the instant the disk has completed
three revolutions, starting from rest? (b)
Determine the torque due to the force, then
calculate the work done by this torque at the
instant the disk has completed three
revolutions? (c) What is the angular velocity at
that instant? (d) What is the power output of the
force at that instant?
104 . An athlete in a gym applies a constant force of
50 N to the pedals of a bicycle at a rate of the
pedals moving 60 rev/min. The length of the
pedal arms is 30 cm. What is the power
delivered to the bicycle by the athlete?
101 . A propeller is accelerated from rest to an angular
105 . A 2-kg block on a frictionless inclined plane at
velocity of 1000 rev/min over a period of 6.0
has a cord attached to a pulley of mass 1 kg
seconds by a constant torque of
and radius 20 cm (see the following figure). The
. (a) What is the moment of
block slides a distance of 0.50 m. (a) What is the

512 10 • Chapter Review
acceleration of the block down the plane? (b) (see below). What distance d from should the
What is the work done by the cord on the pulley? rotational axis be so that a minimum amount of
work is required to set the rod rotating at an
angular velocity
106 . Small bodies of mass are attached to
opposite ends of a thin rigid rod of length L and
mass M. The rod is mounted so that it is free to
rotate in a horizontal plane around a vertical axis
Additional Problems
107 . A cyclist is riding such that the wheels of the moment of inertia of the system? (b) What is the
bicycle have a rotation rate of 3.0 rev/s. If the rotational kinetic energy of the system?
cyclist brakes such that the rotation rate of the
113 . Calculate the moment of inertia of a skater given
wheels decrease at a rate of , how
the following information. (a) The 60.0-kg skater
long does it take for the cyclist to come to a
is approximated as a cylinder that has a
complete stop?
0.110-m radius. (b) The skater with arms
108 . Calculate the angular velocity of the orbital extended is approximated by a cylinder that is
motion of Earth around the Sun. 52.5 kg, has a 0.110-m radius, and has two
0.900-m-long arms which are 3.75 kg each and
109 . A phonograph turntable rotating at 33 1/3 rev/
extend straight out from the cylinder like rods
min slows down and stops in 1.0 min. (a) What is
rotated about their ends.
the turntable’s angular acceleration, in
radians/s2, assuming it is constant? (b) How 114 . A stick of length 1.0 m and mass 6.0 kg is free to
many revolutions does the turntable make while rotate about a horizontal axis through the center.
stopping? Small bodies of masses 4.0 and 2.0 kg are attached
to its two ends (see the following figure). The stick is
110 . With the aid of a string, a gyroscope is
released from the horizontal position. What is the
accelerated from rest to 32 rad/s in 0.40 s under
angular velocity of the stick when it swings through
a constant angular acceleration. (a) What is its
the vertical?
angular acceleration in ? (b) How many
revolutions does it go through in the process?
111 . Suppose a piece of dust has fallen on a CD. If the
spin rate of the CD is 500 rpm, and the piece of
dust is 4.3 cm from the center, what is the total
distance traveled by the dust in 3 minutes?
(Ignore accelerations due to getting the CD
rotating.)
112 . A system of point particles is rotating about a
fixed axis at 4 rev/s. The particles are fixed with
respect to each other. The masses and distances
to the axis of the point particles are
, 115 . A pendulum consists of a rod of length 2 m and
, mass 3 kg with a solid sphere of mass 1 kg and
. (a) What is the radius 0.3 m attached at one end. The axis of
Access for free at openstax.org

10 • Chapter Review 513
rotation is as shown below. What is the angular a force of 17.5 N at a distance of 0.600 m from
velocity of the pendulum at its lowest point if it the hinges, and the second child pushes at a
is released from rest at an angle of distance of 0.450 m. What force must the
second child exert to keep the door from
moving? Assume friction is negligible.
118 . The force of is applied at
. What is the torque of this
force about the origin?
119 . An automobile engine can produce 200 N m of
torque. Calculate the angular acceleration
produced if 95.0% of this torque is applied to
the drive shaft, axle, and rear wheels of a car,
given the following information. The car is
suspended so that the wheels can turn freely.
Each wheel acts like a 15.0-kg disk that has a
0.180-m radius. The walls of each tire act like a
2.00-kg annular ring that has inside radius of
0.180 m and outside radius of 0.320 m. The
tread of each tire acts like a 10.0-kg hoop of
116 . Calculate the torque of the 40-N force around the
radius 0.330 m. The 14.0-kg axle acts like a rod
axis through O and perpendicular to the plane of the
that has a 2.00-cm radius. The 30.0-kg drive
page as shown below.
shaft acts like a rod that has a 3.20-cm radius.
120 . A grindstone with a mass of 50 kg and radius 0.8
m maintains a constant rotation rate of 4.0 rev/s
by a motor while a knife is pressed against the
edge with a force of 5.0 N. The coefficient of
kinetic friction between the grindstone and the
blade is 0.8. What is the power provided by the
motor to keep the grindstone at the constant
117 . Two children push on opposite sides of a door rotation rate?
during play. Both push horizontally and
perpendicular to the door. One child pushes with
Challenge Problems
121 . The angular acceleration of a rotating rigid body
is given by . If the body
starts rotating from rest at , (a) what is the
angular velocity? (b) Angular position? (c) What
angle does it rotate through in 10 s? (d) Where
does the vector perpendicular to the axis of
rotation indicating at lie at ?
122 . Earth’s day has increased by 0.002 s in the last
century. If this increase in Earth’s period is
constant, how long will it take for Earth to come
to rest? 124 . Zorch, an archenemy of Rotation Man, decides to
slow Earth’s rotation to once per 28.0 h by
123 . A disk of mass m, radius R, and area A has a
exerting an opposing force at and parallel to the
surface mass density (see the following
equator. Rotation Man is not immediately
figure). What is the moment of inertia of the disk
concerned, because he knows Zorch can only
about an axis through the center?
exert a force of (a little greater
than a Saturn V rocket’s thrust). How long must

514 10 • Chapter Review
Zorch push with this force to accomplish his have unwound?
goal? (This period gives Rotation Man time to
devote to other villains.)
125 . A cord is wrapped around the rim of a solid cylinder
of radius 0.25 m, and a constant force of 40 N is
exerted on the cord shown, as shown in the
following figure. The cylinder is mounted on
frictionless bearings, and its moment of inertia is
. (a) Use the work energy theorem to
calculate the angular velocity of the cylinder after
5.0 m of cord have been removed. (b) If the 40-N
force is replaced by a 40-N weight, what is the
angular velocity of the cylinder after 5.0 m of cord
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 11
Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.1 A helicopter has its main lift blades rotating to keep the aircraft airborne. Due to conservation of angular momentum, the
body of the helicopter would want to rotate in the opposite sense to the blades, if it were not for the small rotor on the tail of the aircraft,
which provides thrust to stabilize it.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1 Rolling Motion
11.2 Angular Momentum
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
INTRODUCTION Angular momentum is the rotational counterpart of linear momentum. Any massive object that
rotates about an axis carries angular momentum, including rotating flywheels, planets, stars, hurricanes, tornadoes,
whirlpools, and so on. The helicopter shown in the chapter-opening picture can be used to illustrate the concept of
angular momentum. The lift blades spin about a vertical axis through the main body and carry angular momentum.
The body of the helicopter tends to rotate in the opposite sense in order to conserve angular momentum. The small
rotors at the tail of the aircraft provide a counter thrust against the body to prevent this from happening, and the
helicopter stabilizes itself. The concept of conservation of angular momentum is discussed later in this chapter. In
the main part of this chapter, we explore the intricacies of angular momentum of rigid bodies such as a top, and also
of point particles and systems of particles. But to be complete, we start with a discussion of rolling motion, which
builds upon the concepts of the previous chapter.

516 11 • Angular Momentum
11.1 Rolling Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physics of rolling motion without slipping
• Explain how linear variables are related to angular variables for the case of rolling motion without slipping
• Find the linear and angular accelerations in rolling motion with and without slipping
• Calculate the static friction force associated with rolling motion without slipping
• Use energy conservation to analyze rolling motion
Rolling motion is that common combination of rotational and translational motion that we see everywhere, every
day. Think about the different situations of wheels moving on a car along a highway, or wheels on a plane landing on
a runway, or wheels on a robotic explorer on another planet. Understanding the forces and torques involved in
rolling motion is a crucial factor in many different types of situations.
For analyzing rolling motion in this chapter, refer to Figure 10.20 in Fixed-Axis Rotation to find moments of inertia of
some common geometrical objects. You may also find it useful in other calculations involving rotation.
Rolling Motion without Slipping
People have observed rolling motion without slipping ever since the invention of the wheel. For example, we can
look at the interaction of a car’s tires and the surface of the road. If the driver depresses the accelerator to the floor,
such that the tires spin without the car moving forward, there must be kinetic friction between the wheels and the
surface of the road. If the driver depresses the accelerator slowly, causing the car to move forward, then the tires
roll without slipping. It is surprising to most people that, in fact, the bottom of the wheel is at rest with respect to
the ground, indicating there must be static friction between the tires and the road surface. In Figure 11.2, the
bicycle is in motion with the rider staying upright. The tires have contact with the road surface, and, even though
they are rolling, the bottoms of the tires deform slightly, do not slip, and are at rest with respect to the road surface
for a measurable amount of time. There must be static friction between the tire and the road surface for this to be
so.
FIGURE 11.2 (a) The bicycle moves forward, and its tires do not slip. The bottom of the slightly deformed tire is at rest with respect to the
road surface for a measurable amount of time. (b) This image shows that the top of a rolling wheel appears blurred by its motion, but the
bottom of the wheel is instantaneously at rest. (credit a: modification of work by Nelson Lourenço; credit b: modification of work by Colin
Rose)
To analyze rolling without slipping, we first derive the linear variables of velocity and acceleration of the center of
mass of the wheel in terms of the angular variables that describe the wheel’s motion. The situation is shown in
Figure 11.3.
Access for free at openstax.org