# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 501-509
############################################################

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 491
95. Consider the infinitely long chain of resistors shown
below. What is the resistance between terminalsaandb?
97. A 120-V immersion heater consists of a coil of wire
that is placed in a cup to boil the water. The heater can
boil one cup of 20.00°C water in 180.00 seconds. You
buy one to use in your dorm room, but you are worried
that you will overload the circuit and trip the 15.00-A,
120-Vcircuit breaker,whichsupplies yourdormroom.In
your dorm room, you have four 100.00-W incandescent
96. Consider the circuit below. The capacitor has a
lampsanda1500.00-Wspaceheater.(a)Whatisthepower
capacitanceof10mF.Theswitchisclosedandafteralong
ratingoftheimmersionheater?(b)Willittripthebreaker
timethecapacitorisfullycharged.(a)Whatisthecurrent
when everything is turned on? (c) If it you replace the
througheachresistoralongtimeaftertheswitchisclosed?
incandescentbulbswith18.00-WLED,willthebreakertrip
(b) What is the voltage across each resistor a long time
when everything is turned on?
aftertheswitchisclosed?(c)Whatisthevoltageacrossthe
capacitor a long time after the switch is closed? (d) What
98. Findtheresistance thatmustbeplacedinserieswith
is the charge on the capacitor a long time after the switch
is closed? (e) The switch is then opened. The capacitor a 25.0-Ω galvanometerhavinga 50.0-µA sensitivity(the
discharges through the resistors. How long from the time sameastheonediscussedinthetext)toallowittobeused
before the current drops to one fifth of the initial value? as a voltmeter with a 3000-V full-scale reading. Include a
circuit diagram with your solution.
99. Findtheresistancethatmustbeplacedinparallelwith
a 60.0-Ω galvanometerhavinga1.00-mAsensitivity(the
sameastheonediscussedinthetext)toallowittobeused
as an ammeter with a 25.0-A full-scale reading. Include a
circuit diagram with your solution.

492 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 493
11 | MAGNETIC FORCES
AND FIELDS
Figure 11.1 An industrial electromagnet is capable of lifting thousands of pounds of metallic waste. (credit: modification of
work by “BedfordAl”/Flickr)
Chapter Outline
11.1Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries
11.2Magnetic Fields and Lines
11.3Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
11.4Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
11.5Force and Torque on a Current Loop
11.6The Hall Effect
11.7Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
Introduction
For the past few chapters, we have been studying electrostatic forces and fields, which are caused by electric charges at
rest.Theseelectricfieldscanmoveotherfreecharges,suchasproducingacurrentinacircuit;however,theelectrostatic
forcesandfieldsthemselvescomefromotherstaticcharges.Inthischapter,weseethatwhenanelectricchargemoves,it
generates other forces and fields. These additional forces and fields are what we commonly call magnetism.
Before we examine the origins of magnetism, we first describe what it is and how magnetic fields behave. Once we are
more familiar with magnetic effects, we can explain how they arise from the behavior of atoms and molecules, and how
magnetismisrelatedtoelectricity.Theconnectionbetweenelectricityandmagnetismisfascinatingfromatheoreticalpoint
of view, but it is also immensely practical, as shown by an industrial electromagnet that can lift thousands of pounds of
metal.

494 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
11.1 | Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain attraction and repulsion by magnets
• Describe the historical and contemporary applications of magnetism
Magnetism has been known since the time of the ancient Greeks, but it has always been a bit mysterious. You can see
electricity in the flash of a lightning bolt, but when a compass needle points to magnetic north, you can’t see any force
causing it to rotate. People learned about magnetic properties gradually, over many years, before several physicists of
thenineteenthcenturyconnectedmagnetismwithelectricity.Inthissection,wereviewthebasicideasofmagnetismand
describe how they fit into the picture of a magnetic field.
Brief History of Magnetism
Magnets are commonly found in everyday objects, such as toys, hangers, elevators, doorbells, and computer devices.
Experimentationonthesemagnetsshowsthatallmagnetshavetwopoles:Oneislabelednorth(N)andtheotherislabeled
south(S).Magneticpolesrepeliftheyarealike(bothNorbothS),theyattractiftheyareopposite(oneNandtheotherS),
andbothpolesofamagnetattractunmagnetizedpiecesofiron.Animportantpointtonotehereisthatyoucannotisolate
anindividualmagneticpole.Everypieceofamagnet,nomatterhowsmall,whichcontainsanorthpolemustalsocontain
a south pole.
Visitthiswebsite(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21magnetcompass)foraninteractivedemonstrationof
magnetic north and south poles.
Anexampleofamagnetisacompassneedle.Itissimplyathinbarmagnetsuspendedatitscenter,soitisfreetorotatein
ahorizontalplane.Earthitselfalsoactslikeaverylargebarmagnet,withitssouth-seekingpolenearthegeographicNorth
Pole(Figure 11.2).ThenorthpoleofacompassisattractedtowardEarth’sgeographicNorthPolebecausethemagnetic
polethatisnearthegeographicNorthPoleisactuallyasouthmagneticpole.Confusionarisesbecausethegeographicterm
“NorthPole”hascometobeused(incorrectly)forthemagneticpolethatisneartheNorthPole.Thus,“northmagnetic
pole”isactuallyamisnomer—itshouldbecalledthesouthmagneticpole.[NotethattheorientationofEarth’smagnetic
fieldisnotpermanentbutchanges(“flips”)afterlongtimeintervals.Eventually,Earth’snorthmagneticpolemaybelocated
near its geographic North Pole.]
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 495
Figure 11.2 The north pole of a compass needle points toward
the south pole of a magnet, which is how today’s magnetic field
is oriented from inside Earth. It also points toward Earth’s
geographic North Pole because the geographic North Pole is
near the magnetic south pole.
Backin1819,theDanishphysicistHansOerstedwasperformingalecturedemonstrationforsomestudentsandnoticedthat
acompassneedlemovedwhenevercurrentflowedinanearbywire.Furtherinvestigationofthisphenomenonconvinced
Oerstedthatanelectriccurrentcouldsomehowcauseamagneticforce.Hereportedthisfindingtoan1820meetingofthe
French Academy of Science.
Soonafterthisreport,Oersted’sinvestigationswererepeatedandexpandeduponbyotherscientists.Amongthosewhose
workwasespeciallyimportantwereJean-BaptisteBiotandFelixSavart,whoinvestigatedtheforcesexertedonmagnetsby
currents;AndréMarieAmpère,whostudiedtheforcesexertedbyonecurrentonanother;FrançoisArago,whofoundthat
ironcouldbemagnetizedbyacurrent;andHumphryDavy,whodiscoveredthatamagnetexertsaforceonawirecarrying
anelectriccurrent.Within10yearsofOersted’sdiscovery,MichaelFaradayfoundthattherelativemotionofamagnetand
a metallic wire induced current in the wire. This finding showed not only that a current has a magnetic effect, but that a
magnetcangenerateelectriccurrent.YouwillseelaterthatthenamesofBiot,Savart,Ampère,andFaradayarelinkedto
some of the fundamental laws of electromagnetism.
The evidence from these various experiments led Ampère to propose that electric current is the source of all magnetic
phenomena.Toexplainpermanentmagnets,hesuggestedthatmattercontainsmicroscopiccurrentloopsthataresomehow
alignedwhenamaterialismagnetized.Today,weknowthatpermanentmagnetsareactuallycreatedbythealignmentof
spinningelectrons,asituationquitesimilartothatproposedbyAmpère.Thismodelofpermanentmagnetswasdeveloped
byAmpèrealmostacenturybeforetheatomicnatureofmatterwasunderstood.(Forafullquantummechanicaltreatment
of magnetic spins, see Quantum Mechanics (http://cnx.org/content/m58573/latest/) and Atomic Structure
(http://cnx.org/content/m58583/latest/).)
Contemporary Applications of Magnetism
Today, magnetism plays many important roles in our lives. Physicists’ understanding of magnetism has enabled the
developmentoftechnologiesthataffectbothindividualsandsociety.Theelectronictabletinyourpurseorbackpack,for
example,wouldn’thavebeenpossiblewithouttheapplicationsofmagnetismandelectricityonasmallscale(Figure11.3).
Weakchangesinamagneticfieldinathinfilmofironandchromiumwerediscoveredtobringaboutmuchlargerchanges
inresistance,calledgiantmagnetoresistance.Informationcanthenberecordedmagneticallybasedonthedirectioninwhich
theironlayerismagnetized.Asaresultofthediscoveryofgiantmagnetoresistanceanditsapplicationstodigitalstorage,
the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Albert Fert from France and Peter Grunberg from Germany.

496 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
Figure 11.3 Engineering technology like computer storage
would not be possible without a deep understanding of
magnetism. (credit: Klaus Eifert)
Allelectricmotors—withusesasdiverseaspoweringrefrigerators,startingcars,andmovingelevators—containmagnets.
Generators, whether producing hydroelectric power or running bicycle lights, use magnetic fields. Recycling facilities
employmagnetstoseparateironfromotherrefuse.Researchintousingmagneticcontainmentoffusionasafutureenergy
sourcehasbeencontinuingforseveralyears.Magneticresonanceimaging(MRI)hasbecomeanimportantdiagnostictool
in the field of medicine, and the use of magnetism to explore brain activity is a subject of contemporary research and
development.Thelistofapplicationsalsoincludescomputerharddrives,taperecording,detectionofinhaledasbestos,and
levitation of high-speed trains. Magnetism is involved in the structure of atomic energy levels, as well as the motion of
cosmicraysandchargedparticlestrappedintheVanAllenbeltsaroundEarth.Onceagain,weseethatallthesedisparate
phenomena are linked by a small number of underlying physical principles.
11.2 | Magnetic Fields and Lines
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the magnetic field based on a moving charge experiencing a force
• Apply the right-hand rule to determine the direction of a magnetic force based on the motion of
a charge in a magnetic field
• Sketch magnetic field lines to understand which way the magnetic field points and how strong it
is in a region of space
We have outlined the properties of magnets, described how they behave, and listed some of the applications of magnetic
properties.Eventhoughtherearenosuchthingsasisolatedmagneticcharges,wecanstilldefinetheattractionandrepulsion
ofmagnetsasbasedonafield.Inthissection,wedefinethemagneticfield,determineitsdirectionbasedontheright-hand
rule, and discuss how to draw magnetic field lines.
Defining the Magnetic Field
Amagneticfieldisdefinedbytheforcethatachargedparticleexperiencesmovinginthisfield,afterweaccountforthe
gravitational and any additional electric forces possible on the charge. The magnitude of this force is proportional to the
amountofchargeq,thespeedofthechargedparticlev,andthemagnitudeoftheappliedmagneticfield.Thedirectionof
this force is perpendicular to both the direction of the moving charged particle and the direction of the applied magnetic
→
field.Basedontheseobservations,wedefinethemagneticfieldstrengthBbasedonthemagneticforce F onacharge
qmoving at velocity → v as the cross product of the velocity and magnetic field, that is,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields 497
→ → → (11.1)
F =q v × B .
→
Infact,thisishowwedefinethemagneticfield B —intermsoftheforceonachargedparticlemovinginamagnetic
field.Themagnitudeoftheforceisdeterminedfromthedefinitionofthecrossproductasitrelatestothemagnitudesof
each of the vectors. In other words, the magnitude of the force satisfies
F =qvBsinθ (11.2)
whereθis the angle between the velocity and the magnetic field.
The SI unit for magnetic field strength B is called the tesla (T) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Nikola Tesla
(1856–1943), where
1N (11.3)
1T= .
A·m
A smaller unit, called the gauss (G), where 1G=10−4T, is sometimes used. The strongest permanent magnets have
fieldsnear2T;superconductingelectromagnetsmayattain10Tormore.Earth’smagneticfieldonitssurfaceisonlyabout
5×10 −5 T, or 0.5 G.
Problem-Solving Strategy: Direction of the Magnetic Field by the Right-Hand Rule
Thedirectionofthemagneticforce → F isperpendiculartotheplaneformedby → v and → B , asdeterminedby
theright-hand rule-1(or RHR-1), which is illustrated inFigure 11.4.
1. Orientyourrighthandsothatyourfingerscurlintheplanedefinedbythevelocityandmagneticfieldvectors.
2. Using your right hand, sweep from the velocity toward the magnetic field with your fingers through the
smallest angle possible.
3. The magnetic force is directed where your thumb is pointing.
4. If the charge was negative, reverse the direction found by these steps.

498 Chapter 11 | Magnetic Forces and Fields
Figure 11.4 Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges.
The direction of the magnetic force on a moving charge is
perpendicular to the plane formed by → v and → B and
follows the right-hand rule-1 (RHR-1) as shown. The magnitude
of the force is proportional to q, v, B, and the sine of the
angle between → v and → B .
Visitthiswebsite(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21magfields)foradditionalpracticewiththedirectionof
magnetic fields.
There is no magnetic force on static charges. However, there is a magnetic force on charges moving at an angle to a
magneticfield.Whenchargesarestationary,theirelectricfieldsdonotaffectmagnets.However,whenchargesmove,they
producemagnetic fields that exert forces onothermagnets. Whenthere isrelative motion, aconnection between electric
and magnetic forces emerges—each affects the other.
Example 11.1
An Alpha-Particle Moving in a Magnetic Field
An alpha-particle ⎛q=3.2×10 −19 C ⎞ moves through a uniform magnetic field whose magnitude is 1.5 T.
⎝ ⎠
The field is directly parallel to the positive z-axis of the rectangular coordinate system of Figure 11.5. What
is the magnetic force on the alpha-particle when it is moving (a) in the positive x-direction with a speed of
5.0×104m/s? (b)inthenegativey-directionwithaspeedof 5.0×104m/s? (c)inthepositivez-directionwith
a speed of 5.0×104m/s? (d) with a velocity → v = ⎛ 2.0 ^ i −3.0 ^ j +1.0 ^ k ⎞ ×104m/s?
⎝ ⎠
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9