# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 591-598
############################################################

Chapter 13 | Electromagnetic Induction 581
13 | ELECTROMAGNETIC
INDUCTION
Figure 13.1 The black strip found on the back of credit cards and driver’s licenses is a very thin layer of magnetic material
with information stored on it. Reading and writing the information on the credit card is done with a swiping motion. The physical
reason why this is necessary is called electromagnetic induction and is discussed in this chapter. (credit: modification of work by
Jane Whitney)
Chapter Outline
13.1Faraday’s Law
13.2Lenz's Law
13.3Motional Emf
13.4Induced Electric Fields
13.5Eddy Currents
13.6Electric Generators and Back Emf
13.7Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
Introduction
We have been considering electric fields created by fixed charge distributions and magnetic fields produced by constant
currents,butelectromagneticphenomenaarenotrestrictedtothesestationarysituations.Mostoftheinterestingapplications
of electromagnetism are, in fact, time-dependent. To investigate some of these applications, we now remove the time-
independent assumption that we have been making and allow the fields to vary with time. In this and the next several
chapters, you will see a wonderful symmetry in the behavior exhibited by time-varying electric and magnetic fields.
Mathematically, this symmetry is expressed by an additional term in Ampère’s law and by another key equation of
electromagnetismcalledFaraday’slaw.Wealsodiscusshowmovingawirethroughamagneticfieldproducesanemfor
voltage. Lastly, we describe applications of these principles, such as the card reader shown above.

582 Chapter 13 | Electromagnetic Induction
13.1 | Faraday’s Law
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the magnetic flux through a surface, knowing the strength of the magnetic field, the
surface area, and the angle between the normal to the surface and the magnetic field
• Use Faraday’s law to determine the magnitude of induced emf in a closed loop due to changing
magnetic flux through the loop
Thefirstproductiveexperimentsconcerningtheeffectsoftime-varyingmagneticfieldswereperformedbyMichaelFaraday
in 1831. One of his early experiments is represented in Figure 13.2. An emf is induced when the magnetic field in the
coilischangedbypushingabarmagnetintooroutofthecoil.Emfsofoppositesignsareproducedbymotioninopposite
directions,andthedirectionsofemfsarealsoreversedbyreversingpoles.Thesameresultsareproducedifthecoilismoved
ratherthanthemagnet—itistherelativemotionthatisimportant.Thefasterthemotion,thegreatertheemf,andthereisno
emf when the magnet is stationary relative to the coil.
Figure 13.2 Movement of a magnet relative to a coil produces emfs as shown (a–d). The same emfs are produced if the coil
is moved relative to the magnet. This short-lived emf is only present during the motion. The greater the speed, the greater the
magnitude of the emf, and the emf is zero when there is no motion, as shown in (e).
Faradayalsodiscoveredthatasimilareffectcanbeproducedusingtwocircuits—achangingcurrentinonecircuitinduces
acurrentinasecond,nearbycircuit.Forexample,whentheswitchisclosedincircuit1ofFigure 13.3(a),theammeter
needle of circuit 2 momentarily deflects, indicating that a short-lived current surge has been induced in that circuit. The
ammeterneedlequicklyreturnstoitsoriginalposition,whereitremains.However,iftheswitchofcircuit1isnowsuddenly
opened, another short-lived current surge in the direction opposite from before is observed in circuit 2.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 13 | Electromagnetic Induction 583
Figure 13.3 (a) Closing the switch of circuit 1 produces a short-lived current surge in circuit 2. (b) If the switch remains
closed, no current is observed in circuit 2. (c) Opening the switch again produces a short-lived current in circuit 2 but in the
opposite direction from before.
Faradayrealizedthatinbothexperiments,acurrentflowedinthecircuitcontainingtheammeteronlywhenthemagnetic
field in the region occupied by that circuit was changing. As the magnet of the figure was moved, the strength of its
magneticfieldattheloopchanged;andwhenthecurrentincircuit1wasturnedonoroff,thestrengthofitsmagneticfield
atcircuit2changed.Faradaywaseventuallyabletointerprettheseandallotherexperimentsinvolvingmagneticfieldsthat
vary with time in terms of the following law:
Faraday’s Law
Theemf ε inducedisthenegativechangeinthemagneticflux Φm perunittime.Anychangeinthemagneticfield
or change in orientation of the area of the coil with respect to the magnetic field induces a voltage (emf).
Themagneticfluxisameasurementoftheamountofmagneticfieldlinesthroughagivensurfacearea,asseeninFigure
13.4. This definition is similar to the electric flux studied earlier. This means that if we have
→ ^ (13.1)
Φm=∫ B ·ndA,
S
then theinduced emfor the voltage generated by a conductor or coil moving in a magnetic field is
ε= −
d
∫
→
B ·
^
ndA= −
dΦm. (13.2)
dt dt
S
Thenegativesigndescribesthedirectioninwhichtheinducedemfdrivescurrentaroundacircuit.However,thatdirection
is most easily determined with a rule known as Lenz’s law, which we will discuss shortly.

584 Chapter 13 | Electromagnetic Induction
Figure 13.4 The magnetic flux is the amount of magnetic
field lines cutting through a surface areaAdefined by the unit
^ ^
area vector n. If the angle between the unit area n and
→
magnetic field vector B are parallel or antiparallel, as shown
in the diagram, the magnetic flux is the highest possible value
given the values of area and magnetic field.
Part(a)ofFigure 13.5depictsacircuitandanarbitrarysurfaceSthatitbounds.NoticethatSisanopensurface.Itcan
beshownthatanyopensurfaceboundedbythecircuitinquestioncanbeusedtoevaluate Φm. Forexample, Φm isthe
same for the various surfaces S , S , … of part (b) of the figure.
1 2
Figure 13.5 (a) A circuit bounding an arbitrary open surfaceS. The planar area bounded by the circuit is not
part ofS. (b) Three arbitrary open surfaces bounded by the same circuit. The value of Φm is the same for all
these surfaces.
The SI unit for magnetic flux is theweber(Wb),
1Wb=1T·m2.
Occasionally, the magnetic field unit is expressed as webers per square meter (Wb/m2) instead of teslas, based on this
definition.Inmanypracticalapplications,thecircuitofinterestconsistsofanumberNoftightlywoundturns(seeFigure
13.6).Eachturnexperiencesthesamemagneticflux.Therefore,thenetmagneticfluxthroughthecircuitsisNtimesthe
flux through one turn, and Faraday’s law is written as
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 13 | Electromagnetic Induction 585
ε= −
d
d
t
(NΦm)=−N dΦ
dt
m. (13.3)
Example 13.1
A Square Coil in a Changing Magnetic Field
ThesquarecoilofFigure 13.6hassides l=0.25m longandistightlywoundwith N =200 turnsofwire.
Theresistanceofthecoilis R=5.0Ω. Thecoilisplacedinaspatiallyuniformmagneticfieldthatisdirected
perpendiculartothefaceofthecoilandwhosemagnitudeisdecreasingatarate dB/dt=−0.040T/s. (a)What
isthemagnitudeoftheemfinducedinthecoil?(b)Whatisthemagnitudeofthecurrentcirculatingthroughthe
coil?
Figure 13.6 A square coil withNturns of wire with uniform
→
magnetic field B directed in the downward direction,
perpendicular to the coil.
Strategy
Theareavector,or ^ n direction,isperpendiculartoareacoveringtheloop.Wewillchoosethistobepointing
downwardsothat → B isparallelto ^ n andthatthefluxturnsintomultiplicationofmagneticfieldtimesarea.
Theareaoftheloopisnotchangingintime,soitcanbefactoredoutofthetimederivative,leavingthemagnetic
fieldastheonlyquantityvaryingintime.Lastly,wecanapplyOhm’slawonceweknowtheinducedemftofind
the current in the loop.
Solution
a. The flux through one turn is
Φm=BA=Bl2,
sowecancalculatethemagnitudeoftheemffromFaraday’slaw.Thesignoftheemfwillbediscussed
in the next section, on Lenz’s law:
|ε| = | −N dΦm| =Nl2dB
dt dt
=(200)(0.25m)2(0.040T/s)=0.50V.

586 Chapter 13 | Electromagnetic Induction
b. The magnitude of the current induced in the coil is
I = ε = 0.50V =0.10A.
R 5.0Ω
Significance
Iftheareaoftheloopwerechangingintime,wewouldnotbeabletopullitoutofthetimederivative.Sincethe
loopisaclosedpath,theresultofthiscurrentwouldbeasmallamountofheatingofthewiresuntilthemagnetic
field stops changing. This may increase the area of the loop slightly as the wires are heated.
13.1 Check Your Understanding A closely wound coil has a radius of 4.0 cm, 50 turns, and a total
resistanceof 40Ω.Atwhatratemustamagneticfieldperpendiculartothefaceofthecoilchangeinorderto
produce Joule heating in the coil at a rate of 2.0 mW?
13.2 | Lenz's Law
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use Lenz’s law to determine the direction of induced emf whenever a magnetic flux changes
• Use Faraday’s law with Lenz’s law to determine the induced emf in a coil and in a solenoid
The direction in which the induced emf drives current around a wire loop can be found through the negative sign.
However,itisusuallyeasiertodeterminethisdirectionwithLenz’slaw,namedinhonorofitsdiscoverer,HeinrichLenz
(1804–1865). (Faraday also discovered this law, independently of Lenz.) We state Lenz’s law as follows:
Lenz’s Law
Thedirectionoftheinducedemfdrivescurrentaroundawirelooptoalwaysopposethechangeinmagneticfluxthat
causes the emf.
Lenz’slawcanalsobeconsidered interms ofconservation ofenergy.Ifpushingamagnet intoacoil causes current, the
energyinthatcurrentmusthavecomefromsomewhere.Iftheinducedcurrentcausesamagneticfieldopposingtheincrease
in field of the magnet we pushed in, then the situation is clear. We pushed a magnet against a field and did work on the
system, and that showed up as current. If it were not the case that the induced field opposes the change in the flux, the
magnetwouldbepulledinproduceacurrentwithoutanythinghavingdonework.Electricpotentialenergywouldhavebeen
created, violating the conservation of energy.
Todetermineaninducedemf ε,youfirstcalculatethemagneticflux Φm andthenobtain dΦm/dt. Themagnitudeof ε
isgivenby ε=|dΦm/dt|. Finally,youcanapplyLenz’slawtodeterminethesenseof ε.Thiswillbedevelopedthrough
examples that illustrate the following problem-solving strategy.
Problem-Solving Strategy: Lenz’s Law
To use Lenz’s law to determine the directions of induced magnetic fields, currents, and emfs:
1. Make a sketch of the situation for use in visualizing and recording directions.
→
2. Determine the direction of the applied magnetic field B .
3. Determine whether its magnetic flux is increasing or decreasing.
→
4. Nowdeterminethedirectionoftheinducedmagneticfield B . Theinducedmagneticfieldtriestoreinforcea
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 13 | Electromagnetic Induction 587
magneticfluxthatisdecreasingoropposesamagneticfluxthatisincreasing.Therefore,theinducedmagnetic
field adds or subtracts to the applied magnetic field, depending on the change in magnetic flux.
5. Useright-handrule2(RHR-2;seeMagneticForcesandFields)todeterminethedirectionoftheinduced
→
currentIthat is responsible for the induced magnetic field B .
6. The direction (or polarity) of the induced emf can now drive a conventional current in this direction.
Let’s apply Lenz’s law to the system of Figure 13.7(a). We designate the “front” of the closed conducting loop as the
region containing the approaching bar magnet, and the “back” of the loop as the other region. As the north pole of the
magnet moves toward the loop, the flux through the loop due to the field of the magnet increases because the strength
of field lines directed from the front to the back of the loop is increasing. A current is therefore induced in the loop. By
Lenz’slaw,thedirectionoftheinducedcurrentmustbesuchthatitsownmagneticfieldisdirectedinawaytoopposethe
changingfluxcausedbythefieldoftheapproachingmagnet.Hence,theinducedcurrentcirculatessothatitsmagneticfield
lines through the loop are directed from the back to the front of the loop. By RHR-2, place your thumb pointing against
the magnetic field lines, which is toward the bar magnet. Your fingers wrap in a counterclockwise direction as viewed
fromthebarmagnet.Alternatively,wecandeterminethedirectionoftheinducedcurrentbytreatingthecurrentloopasan
electromagnetthatopposestheapproachofthenorthpoleofthebarmagnet.Thisoccurswhentheinducedcurrentflowsas
shown, for then the face of the loop nearer the approaching magnet is also a north pole.
Figure 13.7 The change in magnetic flux caused by the approaching magnet induces a
current in the loop. (a) An approaching north pole induces a counterclockwise current with
respect to the bar magnet. (b) An approaching south pole induces a clockwise current with
respect to the bar magnet.
Part(b)ofthefigureshowsthesouthpoleofamagnetmovingtowardaconductingloop.Inthiscase,thefluxthroughthe
loopduetothefieldofthemagnetincreasesbecausethenumberoffieldlinesdirectedfromthebacktothefrontoftheloop
isincreasing.Toopposethischange,acurrentisinducedintheloopwhosefieldlinesthroughthelooparedirectedfrom
thefronttotheback.Equivalently,wecansaythatthecurrentflowsinadirectionsothatthefaceoftheloopnearerthe
approachingmagnetisasouthpole,whichthenrepelstheapproachingsouthpoleofthemagnet.ByRHR-2,yourthumb
points away from the bar magnet. Your fingers wrap in a clockwise fashion, which is the direction of the induced current.
AnotherexampleillustratingtheuseofLenz’slawisshowninFigure 13.8.Whentheswitchisopened,thedecreasein
current through the solenoid causes a decrease in magnetic flux through its coils, which induces an emf in the solenoid.
Thisemfmustopposethechange(theterminationofthecurrent)causingit.Consequently,theinducedemfhasthepolarity
shownanddrivesinthedirectionoftheoriginalcurrent.Thismaygenerateanarcacrosstheterminalsoftheswitchasitis
opened.