# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 773-779
############################################################

16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 761
conditions other than and For similar reasons, the initial phase is added to the wave function. The
wave function modeling a sinusoidal wave, allowing for an initial phase shift is
16.4
The value
16.5
is known as the phase of the wave, where is the initial phase of the wave function. Whether the temporal term
is negative or positive depends on the direction of the wave. First consider the minus sign for a wave with an initial
phase equal to zero The phase of the wave would be Consider following a point on a wave,
such as a crest. A crest will occur when , that is, when for any integral
value of n. For instance, one particular crest occurs at As the wave moves, time increases and x must
also increase to keep the phase equal to Therefore, the minus sign is for a wave moving in the positive
x-direction. Using the plus sign, As time increases, x must decrease to keep the phase equal to
The plus sign is used for waves moving in the negative x-direction. In summary,
models a wave moving in the positive x-direction and models a wave moving in the
negative x-direction.
Equation 16.4 is known as a simple harmonic wave function. A wave function is any function such that
Later in this chapter, we will see that it is a solution to the linear wave equation. Note that
works equally well because it corresponds to a different phase shift
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Finding the Characteristics of a Sinusoidal Wave
1. To find the amplitude, wavelength, period, and frequency of a sinusoidal wave, write down the wave function
in the form
2. The amplitude can be read straight from the equation and is equal to A.
3. The period of the wave can be derived from the angular frequency
4. The frequency can be found using
5. The wavelength can be found using the wave number
EXAMPLE 16.3
Characteristics of a Traveling Wave on a String
A transverse wave on a taut string is modeled with the wave function
Find the amplitude, wavelength, period, and speed of the wave.
Strategy
All these characteristics of the wave can be found from the constants included in the equation or from simple
combinations of these constants.
Solution
1. The amplitude, wave number, and angular frequency can be read directly from the wave equation:

762 16 • Waves
2. The wave number can be used to find the wavelength:
3. The period of the wave can be found using the angular frequency:
4. The speed of the wave can be found using the wave number and the angular frequency. The direction of the
wave can be determined by considering the sign of : A negative sign suggests that the wave is moving
in the positive x-direction:
Significance
All of the characteristics of the wave are contained in the wave function. Note that the wave speed is the speed of
the wave in the direction parallel to the motion of the wave. Plotting the height of the medium y versus the position x
for two times and can provide a graphical visualization of the wave (Figure 16.11).
FIGURE 16.11 A graph of height of the wave y as a function of position x for snapshots of the wave at two times. The dotted line represents
the wave at time and the solid line represents the wave at Since the wave velocity is constant, the distance the wave
travels is the wave velocity times the time interval. The black dots indicate the points used to measure the displacement of the wave. The
medium moves up and down, whereas the wave moves to the right.
There is a second velocity to the motion. In this example, the wave is transverse, moving horizontally as the medium
oscillates up and down perpendicular to the direction of motion. The graph in Figure 16.12 shows the motion of the
medium at point as a function of time. Notice that the medium of the wave oscillates up and down
between and every period of 4.0 seconds.
Access for free at openstax.org

16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 763
FIGURE 16.12 A graph of height of the wave y as a function of time t for the position The medium oscillates between
and every period. The period represented picks two convenient points in the oscillations to measure the period.
The period can be measured between any two adjacent points with the same amplitude and the same velocity, The velocity can be
found by looking at the slope tangent to the point on a y-versus-t plot. Notice that at times and the heights and the
velocities are the same and the period of the oscillation is 4.00 s.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.3
The wave function above is derived using a sine function. Can a cosine function be used instead?
Velocity and Acceleration of the Medium
As seen in Example 16.4, the wave speed is constant and represents the speed of the wave as it propagates through
the medium, not the speed of the particles that make up the medium. The particles of the medium oscillate around
an equilibrium position as the wave propagates through the medium. In the case of the transverse wave propagating
in the x-direction, the particles oscillate up and down in the y-direction, perpendicular to the motion of the wave.
The velocity of the particles of the medium is not constant, which means there is an acceleration. The velocity of the
medium, which is perpendicular to the wave velocity in a transverse wave, can be found by taking the partial
derivative of the position equation with respect to time. The partial derivative is found by taking the derivative of the
function, treating all variables as constants, except for the variable in question. In the case of the partial derivative
with respect to time t, the position x is treated as a constant. Although this may sound strange if you haven’t seen it
before, the object of this exercise is to find the transverse velocity at a point, so in this sense, the x-position is not
changing. We have
The magnitude of the maximum velocity of the medium is . This may look familiar from the
Oscillations and a mass on a spring.
We can find the acceleration of the medium by taking the partial derivative of the velocity equation with respect to
time,
The magnitude of the maximum acceleration is The particles of the medium, or the mass elements,

764 16 • Waves
oscillate in simple harmonic motion for a mechanical wave.
The Linear Wave Equation
We have just determined the velocity of the medium at a position x by taking the partial derivative, with respect to
time, of the position y. For a transverse wave, this velocity is perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the
wave. We found the acceleration by taking the partial derivative, with respect to time, of the velocity, which is the
second time derivative of the position:
Now consider the partial derivatives with respect to the other variable, the position x, holding the time constant. The
first derivative is the slope of the wave at a point x at a time t,
The second partial derivative expresses how the slope of the wave changes with respect to position—in other words,
the curvature of the wave, where
The ratio of the acceleration and the curvature leads to a very important relationship in physics known as the linear
wave equation. Taking the ratio and using the equation yields the linear wave equation (also known simply
as the wave equation or the equation of a vibrating string),
16.6
Equation 16.6 is the linear wave equation, which is one of the most important equations in physics and engineering.
We derived it here for a transverse wave, but it is equally important when investigating longitudinal waves. This
relationship was also derived using a sinusoidal wave, but it successfully describes any wave or pulse that has the
form These waves result due to a linear restoring force of the medium—thus, the name linear
wave equation. Any wave function that satisfies this equation is a linear wave function.
An interesting aspect of the linear wave equation is that if two wave functions are individually solutions to the linear
wave equation, then the sum of the two linear wave functions is also a solution to the wave equation. Consider two
transverse waves that propagate along the x-axis, occupying the same medium. Assume that the individual waves
can be modeled with the wave functions and which are solutions to the
linear wave equations and are therefore linear wave functions. The sum of the wave functions is the wave function
Consider the linear wave equation:
This has shown that if two linear wave functions are added algebraically, the resulting wave function is also linear.
This wave function models the displacement of the medium of the resulting wave at each position along the x-axis.
Access for free at openstax.org

16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 765
If two linear waves occupy the same medium, they are said to interfere. If these waves can be modeled with a linear
wave function, these wave functions add to form the wave equation of the wave resulting from the interference of
the individual waves. The displacement of the medium at every point of the resulting wave is the algebraic sum of
the displacements due to the individual waves.
Taking this analysis a step further, if wave functions and are solutions to
the linear wave equation, then where A and B are constants, is also a solution to the linear
wave equation. This property is known as the principle of superposition. Interference and superposition are covered
in more detail in Interference of Waves.
EXAMPLE 16.4
Interference of Waves on a String
Consider a very long string held taut by two students, one on each end. Student A oscillates the end of the string
producing a wave modeled with the wave function and student B oscillates the string
producing at twice the frequency, moving in the opposite direction. Both waves move at the same speed The
two waves interfere to form a resulting wave whose wave function is Find the
velocity of the resulting wave using the linear wave equation
Strategy
First, write the wave function for the wave created by the second student. Note that the angular frequency of the
second wave is twice the frequency of the first wave , and since the velocity of the two waves are the same, the
wave number of the second wave is twice that of the first wave Next, write the wave equation for the resulting
wave function, which is the sum of the two individual wave functions. Then find the second partial derivative with
respect to position and the second partial derivative with respect to time. Use the linear wave equation to find the
velocity of the resulting wave.
Solution
1. Write the wave function of the second wave:
2. Write the resulting wave function:
3. Find the partial derivatives:
4. Use the wave equation to find the velocity of the resulting wave:
Significance
The speed of the resulting wave is equal to the speed of the original waves We will show in the next
section that the speed of a simple harmonic wave on a string depends on the tension in the string and the mass per

766 16 • Waves
length of the string. For this reason, it is not surprising that the component waves as well as the resultant wave all
travel at the same speed.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.4
The wave equation works for any wave of the form In the previous
section, we stated that a cosine function could also be used to model a simple harmonic mechanical wave. Check if
the wave
is a solution to the wave equation.
Any disturbance that complies with the wave equation can propagate as a wave moving along the x-axis with a wave
speed v. It works equally well for waves on a string, sound waves, and electromagnetic waves. This equation is
extremely useful. For example, it can be used to show that electromagnetic waves move at the speed of light.
16.3 Wave Speed on a Stretched String
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the factors that affect the speed of a wave on a string
• Write a mathematical expression for the speed of a wave on a string and generalize these concepts for
other media
The speed of a wave depends on the characteristics of the medium. For example, in the case of a guitar, the strings
vibrate to produce the sound. The speed of the waves on the strings, and the wavelength, determine the frequency
of the sound produced. The strings on a guitar have different thickness but may be made of similar material. They
have different linear densities, where the linear density is defined as the mass per length,
16.7
In this chapter, we consider only strings with a constant linear density. If the linear density is constant, then the
mass of a small length of string is For example, if the string has a length of 2.00 m and a
mass of 0.06 kg, then the linear density is If a 1.00-mm section is cut from the string, the
mass of the 1.00-mm length is The guitar also has a method
to change the tension of the strings. The tension of the strings is adjusted by turning spindles, called the tuning
pegs, around which the strings are wrapped. For the guitar, the linear density of the string and the tension in the
string determine the speed of the waves in the string and the frequency of the sound produced is proportional to the
wave speed.
Wave Speed on a String under Tension
To see how the speed of a wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear density, consider a pulse sent
down a taut string (Figure 16.13). When the taut string is at rest at the equilibrium position, the tension in the string
is constant. Consider a small element of the string with a mass equal to The mass element is at rest
and in equilibrium and the force of tension of either side of the mass element is equal and opposite.
FIGURE 16.13 Mass element of a string kept taut with a tension . The mass element is in static equilibrium, and the force of tension
Access for free at openstax.org