# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 222-230
############################################################

212 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
Doestheplanelookanydifferentifyouvaryyouraltitude?No—youstillseetheplanegoingofftoinfinity,nomatterhow
faryouarefromit.ItisimportanttonotethatEquation 5.15isbecauseweareabovetheplane.Ifwewerebelow,the
^
field would point in the −k direction.
Example 5.9
The Field of Two Infinite Planes
Find the electric field everywhere resulting from two infinite planes with equal but opposite charge densities
(Figure 5.26).
Figure 5.26 Two charged infinite planes. Note the direction of
the electric field.
Strategy
We already know the electric field resulting from a single infinite plane, so we may use the principle of
superposition to find the field from two.
Solution
Theelectricfieldpointsawayfromthepositivelychargedplaneandtowardthenegativelychargedplane.Since
the σ areequal andopposite, thismeans that intheregionoutside ofthetwoplanes, theelectric fields cancel
each other out to zero.
However, in the region between the planes, the electric fields add, and we get
→ σ ^
E = ε i
0
^
for the electric field. The i is because in the figure, the field is pointing in the +x-direction.
Significance
Systemsthatmaybeapproximatedastwoinfiniteplanesofthissortprovideausefulmeansofcreatinguniform
electric fields.
5.6 Check Your Understanding What would the electric field look like in a system with two parallel
positively charged planes with equal charge densities?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 213
5.6 | Electric Field Lines
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the purpose of an electric field diagram
• Describe the relationship between a vector diagram and a field line diagram
• Explain the rules for creating a field diagram and why these rules make physical sense
• Sketch the field of an arbitrary source charge
Now that we have some experience calculating electric fields, let’s try to gain some insight into the geometry of electric
fields.Asmentionedearlier,ourmodelisthatthechargeonanobject(thesourcecharge)altersspaceintheregionaroundit
insuchawaythatwhenanotherchargedobject(thetestcharge)isplacedinthatregionofspace,thattestchargeexperiences
anelectricforce.Theconceptofelectricfieldlines,andofelectricfieldlinediagrams,enablesustovisualizethewayin
whichthespaceisaltered,allowingustovisualizethefield.Thepurposeofthissectionistoenableyoutocreatesketches
ofthisgeometry,sowewilllistthespecificstepsandrulesinvolvedincreatinganaccurateandusefulsketchofanelectric
field.
Itisimportanttorememberthatelectricfieldsarethree-dimensional.Althoughinthisbookweincludesomepseudo-three-
dimensionalimages,severalofthediagramsthatyou’llsee(bothhere,andinsubsequentchapters)willbetwo-dimensional
projections, or cross-sections. Always keep in mind that in fact, you’re looking at a three-dimensional phenomenon.
Ourstartingpointisthephysicalfactthattheelectricfieldofthesourcechargecausesatestchargeinthatfieldtoexperience
aforce.Bydefinition,electricfieldvectorspointinthesamedirectionastheelectricforcethata(hypothetical)positivetest
charge would experience, if placed in the field (Figure 5.27)
Figure 5.27 The electric field of a positive point charge. A large number of field vectors are shown. Like all vector
arrows, the length of each vector is proportional to the magnitude of the field at each point. (a) Field in two
dimensions; (b) field in three dimensions.
We’veplottedmanyfieldvectorsinthefigure,whicharedistributeduniformlyaroundthesourcecharge.Sincetheelectric
fieldisavector,thearrowsthatwedrawcorrespondateverypointinspacetoboththemagnitudeandthedirectionofthe
fieldatthatpoint.Asalways,thelengthofthearrowthatwedrawcorrespondstothemagnitudeofthefieldvectoratthat
point.Forapointsourcecharge,thelengthdecreasesbythesquareofthedistancefromthesourcecharge.Inaddition,the

214 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
directionofthefieldvectorisradiallyawayfromthesourcecharge,becausethedirectionoftheelectricfieldisdefinedby
thedirectionoftheforcethatapositivetestchargewouldexperienceinthatfield.(Again,keepinmindthattheactualfield
is three-dimensional; there are also field lines pointing out of and into the page.)
This diagram is correct, but it becomes less useful as the source charge distribution becomes more complicated. For
example, consider the vector field diagram of a dipole (Figure 5.28).
Figure 5.28 The vector field of a dipole. Even with just two
identical charges, the vector field diagram becomes difficult to
understand.
Thereisamoreusefulwaytopresentthesameinformation. Rather thandrawingalargenumberofincreasingly smaller
vector arrows, we instead connect all of them together, forming continuous lines and curves, as shown inFigure 5.29.
Figure 5.29 (a) The electric field line diagram of a positive point charge. (b) The field line diagram
of a dipole. In both diagrams, the magnitude of the field is indicated by the field line density. The
fieldvectors(not shown here) are everywhere tangent to the field lines.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 215
Althoughitmaynotbeobviousatfirstglance,thesefielddiagramsconveythesameinformationabouttheelectricfieldas
dothevectordiagrams.First,thedirectionofthefieldateverypointissimplythedirectionofthefieldvectoratthatsame
point.Inotherwords,atanypointinspace,thefieldvectorateachpointistangenttothefieldlineatthatsamepoint.The
arrowhead placed on a field line indicates its direction.
As for the magnitude of the field, that is indicated by the field line density—that is, the number of field lines per unit
areapassingthroughasmallcross-sectionalareaperpendiculartotheelectricfield.Thisfieldlinedensityisdrawntobe
proportionaltothemagnitudeofthefieldatthatcross-section.Asaresult,ifthefieldlinesareclosetogether(thatis,the
fieldlinedensityisgreater),thisindicatesthatthemagnitudeofthefieldislargeatthatpoint.Ifthefieldlinesarefarapart
at the cross-section, this indicates the magnitude of the field is small.Figure 5.30shows the idea.
Figure 5.30 Electric field lines passing through imaginary areas. Since the number of
lines passing through each area is the same, but the areas themselves are different, the
field line density is different. This indicates different magnitudes of the electric field at
these points.
InFigure 5.30,thesamenumberoffieldlinespassesthroughbothsurfaces(Sand S′), butthesurfaceSislargerthan
surface S′.Therefore,thedensityoffieldlines(numberoflinesperunitarea)islargeratthelocationof S′,indicatingthat
the electric field is stronger at the location of S′ than atS. The rules for creating an electric field diagram are as follows.
Problem-Solving Strategy: Drawing Electric Field Lines
1. Electric field lines either originate on positive charges or come in from infinity, and either terminate on
negative charges or extend out to infinity.
2. Thenumberoffieldlinesoriginatingorterminatingatachargeisproportionaltothemagnitudeofthatcharge.
A charge of 2qwill have twice as many lines as a charge ofq.
3. At every point in space, the field vector at that point is tangent to the field line at that same point.

216 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
4. Thefieldlinedensityatanypointinspaceisproportionalto(andthereforeisrepresentativeof)themagnitude
of the field at that point in space.
5. Fieldlinescannevercross.Sinceafieldlinerepresentsthedirectionofthefieldatagivenpoint,iftwofield
linescrossedatsomepoint,thatwouldimplythattheelectricfieldwaspointingintwodifferentdirectionsat
asinglepoint.Thisinturnwouldsuggestthatthe(net)forceonatestchargeplacedatthatpointwouldpoint
in two different directions. Since this is obviously impossible, it follows that field lines must never cross.
Always keep in mind that field lines serve only as a convenient way to visualize the electric field; they are not physical
entities.Althoughthedirectionandrelativeintensityoftheelectricfieldcanbededucedfromasetoffieldlines,thelines
canalsobemisleading.Forexample,thefieldlinesdrawntorepresenttheelectricfieldinaregionmust,bynecessity,be
discrete. However, the actual electric field in that region exists at every point in space.
FieldlinesforthreegroupsofdiscretechargesareshowninFigure 5.31.Sincethechargesinparts(a)and(b)havethe
samemagnitude,thesamenumberoffieldlinesareshownstartingfromorterminatingoneachcharge.In(c),however,we
drawthreetimesasmanyfieldlinesleavingthe +3q chargeasenteringthe −q.Thefieldlinesthatdonotterminateat
−q emanate outward from the charge configuration, to infinity.
Figure 5.31 Three typical electric field diagrams. (a) A dipole. (b) Two identical charges. (c) Two charges with opposite
signs and different magnitudes. Can you tell from the diagram which charge has the larger magnitude?
Theabilitytoconstructanaccurateelectricfielddiagramisanimportant,usefulskill;itmakesitmucheasiertoestimate,
predict, and therefore calculate the electric field of a source charge. The best way to develop this skill is with software
thatallowsyoutoplacesourcechargesandthenwilldrawthenetfielduponrequest.Westronglyurgeyoutosearchthe
Internetforaprogram.Onceyou’vefoundoneyoulike,runseveralsimulationstogettheessentialideasoffielddiagram
construction. Then practice drawing field diagrams, and checking your predictions with the computer-drawn diagrams.
One example of a field-line drawing program (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21fieldlindrapr) is from
the PhET “Charges and Fields” simulation.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 217
5.7 | Electric Dipoles
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe a permanent dipole
• Describe an induced dipole
• Define and calculate an electric dipole moment
• Explain the physical meaning of the dipole moment
Earlierwediscussed,andcalculated,theelectricfieldofadipole:twoequalandoppositechargesthatare“close”toeach
other.(Inthiscontext,“close”meansthatthedistancedbetweenthetwochargesismuch,muchlessthanthedistanceof
thefieldpointP,thelocationwhereyouarecalculatingthefield.)Let’snowconsiderwhathappenstoadipolewhenitis
→
placedinanexternalfield E .Weassumethatthedipoleisapermanentdipole;itexistswithoutthefield,anddoesnot
break apart in the external field.
Rotation of a Dipole due to an Electric Field
Fornow,wedealwithonlythesimplestcase:Theexternalfieldisuniforminspace.Supposewehavethesituationdepicted
→
inFigure5.32,wherewedenotethedistancebetweenthechargesasthevector d , pointingfromthenegativecharge
tothepositivecharge.Theforcesonthetwochargesareequalandopposite,sothereisnonetforceonthedipole.However,
there is a torque:
→τ = ⎛ ⎝ ⎜ → d 2 × → F + ⎞ ⎠ ⎟ + ⎛ ⎝ ⎜− → d 2 × → F − ⎞ ⎠ ⎟
= ⎡ ⎢ ⎛ ⎜ → d ⎞ ⎟ × ⎛ +q → E ⎞ + ⎛ ⎜− → d ⎞ ⎟ × ⎛ −q → E ⎞ ⎤ ⎥
⎣⎝ 2 ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ 2 ⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ⎦
→ →
=q d × E .
Figure 5.32 A dipole in an external electric field. (a) The net force on the dipole is zero, but the net torque is not. As a result,
the dipole rotates, becoming aligned with the external field. (b) The dipole moment is a convenient way to characterize this
→ →
effect. The d points in the same direction as p .
→
The quantity q d (the magnitude of each charge multiplied by the vector distance between them) is a property of the
dipole;itsvalue,asyoucansee,determinesthetorquethatthedipoleexperiencesintheexternalfield.Itisuseful,therefore,
to define this product as the so-calleddipole momentof the dipole:
→ → (5.16)
p ≡q d .

218 Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields
We can therefore write
→τ
=
→
p ×
→
E .
(5.17)
Recallthatatorquechangestheangularvelocityofanobject,thedipole,inthiscase.Inthissituation,theeffectistorotate
the dipole (that is, align the direction of → p ) so that it is parallel to the direction of the external field.
Induced Dipoles
Neutralatomsare,bydefinition,electricallyneutral;theyhaveequalamountsofpositiveandnegativecharge.Furthermore,
sincetheyaresphericallysymmetrical,theydonothavea“built-in”dipolemomentthewaymostasymmetricalmolecules
do.Theyobtainone,however,whenplacedinanexternalelectricfield,becausetheexternalfieldcausesoppositelydirected
forcesonthepositivenucleusoftheatomversusthenegativeelectronsthatsurroundthenucleus.Theresultisanewcharge
distribution of the atom, and therefore, aninduced dipolemoment (Figure 5.33).
Figure 5.33 A dipole is induced in a neutral atom by an external electric field. The induced
dipole moment is aligned with the external field.
An important fact here is that, just as for a rotated polar molecule, the result is that the dipole moment ends up aligned
paralleltotheexternalelectricfield.Generally,themagnitudeofaninduceddipoleismuchsmallerthanthatofaninherent
dipole.Forbothkindsofdipoles,noticethatoncethealignmentofthedipole(rotatedorinduced)iscomplete,theneteffect
→ → →
is to decrease the total electric field E = E + E in the regions inside the dipole charges (Figure
total external dipole
5.34). By “inside” we mean in between the charges. This effect is crucial for capacitors, as you will see inCapacitance.
Figure 5.34 The net electric field is the vector sum of the
field of the dipole plus the external field.
Recall that we found the electric field of a dipole inEquation 5.7. If we rewrite it in terms of the dipole moment we get:
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 5 | Electric Charges and Fields 219
→
→ E (z)= 1 p .
4πε
0
z3
The form of this field is shown in Figure 5.34. Notice that along the plane perpendicular to the axis of the dipole and
midwaybetweenthecharges,thedirectionoftheelectricfieldisoppositethatofthedipoleandgetsweakerthefurtherfrom
theaxisonegoes.Similarly,ontheaxisofthedipole(butoutsideit),thefieldpointsinthesamedirectionasthedipole,
again getting weaker the further one gets from the charges.