# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 97-104
############################################################

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 89
farsighted people, you will find the lenses to be thickest in the center. In addition, prescription eyeglasses for
farsighted people have a prescribed optical power that is positive.
2.6 | The Camera
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the optics of a camera
• Characterize the image created by a camera
Camerasareverycommoninoureverydaylife.Between1825and1827,FrenchinventorNicéphoreNiépcesuccessfully
photographedanimagecreatedbyaprimitivecamera.Sincethen,enormousprogresshasbeenachievedinthedesignof
cameras and camera-based detectors.
Initially,photographswererecordedbyusingthelight-sensitivereactionofsilver-basedcompoundssuchassilverchloride
orsilverbromide.Silver-basedphotographicpaperwasincommonuseuntiltheadventofdigitalphotographyinthe1980s,
which is intimately connected to charge-coupled device (CCD) detectors. In a nutshell, a CCD is a semiconductor chip
thatrecordsimagesasamatrixoftinypixels,eachpixellocatedina“bin”inthesurface.Eachpixeliscapableofdetecting
the intensity of light impinging on it. Color is brought into play by putting red-, blue-, and green-colored filters over the
pixels,resultingincoloreddigitalimages(Figure2.34).Atitsbestresolution,oneCCDpixelcorrespondstoonepixelof
theimage.Toreducetheresolutionanddecreasethesizeofthefile,wecan“bin”severalCCDpixelsintoone,resultingin
a smaller but “pixelated” image.
Figure 2.34 A charge-coupled device (CCD) converts light signals into electronic signals, enabling electronic processing
and storage of visual images. This is the basis for electronic imaging in all digital cameras, from cell phones to movie
cameras. (credit left: modification of work by Bruce Turner)
Clearly,electronicsisabigpartofadigitalcamera;however,theunderlyingphysicsisbasicoptics.Asamatteroffact,the
opticsofacameraareprettymuchthesameasthoseofasinglelenswithanobjectdistancethatissignificantlylargerthan
the lens’s focal distance (Figure 2.35).

90 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Figure 2.35 Modern digital cameras have several lenses to produce a clear image with minimal aberration and
use red, blue, and green filters to produce a color image.
Forinstance,letusconsiderthecamerainasmartphone.Anaveragesmartphonecameraisequippedwithastationarywide-
anglelenswithafocallengthofabout4–5mm.(Thisfocallengthisaboutequaltothethicknessofthephone.)Theimage
createdbythelensisfocusedontheCCDdetectormountedattheoppositesideofthephone.Inacellphone,thelensand
theCCDcannotmoverelativetoeachother.Sohowdowemakesurethatboththeimagesofadistantandacloseobject
are in focus?
Recallthatahumaneyecanaccommodatefordistantandcloseimagesbychangingitsfocaldistance.Acellphonecamera
cannotdothatbecausethedistancefromthelenstothedetectorisfixed.Hereiswherethesmallfocaldistancebecomes
important.Letusassumewehaveacamerawitha5-mmfocaldistance.Whatistheimagedistanceforaselfie?Theobject
distance for a selfie (the length of the hand holding the phone) is about 50 cm. Using the thin-lens equation, we can write
1 1 1
= +
5mm 500mm d i
We then obtain the image distance:
1 1 1
= −
d 5mm 500mm
i
Note that the object distance is 100 times larger than the focal distance. We can clearly see that the 1/(500 mm) term is
significantlysmallerthan1/(5mm),whichmeansthattheimagedistanceisprettymuchequaltothelens’sfocallength.An
actual calculation gives us the image distance d i=5.05mm. This value is extremely close to the lens’s focal distance.
Nowletusconsiderthecaseofadistantobject.Letussaythatwewouldliketotakeapictureofapersonstandingabout
5mfromus.Usingthethin-lensequationagain,weobtaintheimagedistanceof5.005mm.Thefarthertheobjectisfrom
thelens,theclosertheimagedistanceistothefocaldistance.Atthelimitingcaseofaninfinitelydistantobject,weobtain
the image distance exactly equal to the focal distance of the lens.
As you can see, the difference between the image distance for a selfie and the image distance for a distant object is just
about 0.05 mm or 50 microns. Even a short object distance such as the length of your hand is two orders of magnitude
largerthanthelens’sfocallength,resultinginminutevariationsoftheimagedistance.(The50-microndifferenceissmaller
thanthethicknessofanaveragesheetofpaper.)Suchasmalldifferencecanbeeasilyaccommodatedbythesamedetector,
positioned at the focal distance of the lens. Image analysis software can help improve image quality.
Conventionalpoint-and-shootcamerasoftenuseamovablelenstochangethelens-to-imagedistance.Complexlensesof
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 91
themoreexpensivemirrorreflexcamerasallowforsuperbqualityphotographicimages.Theopticsofthesecameralenses
is beyond the scope of this textbook.
2.7 | The Simple Magnifier
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand the optics of a simple magnifier
• Characterize the image created by a simple magnifier
Theapparentsizeofanobjectperceived bytheeyedependsontheangletheobjectsubtendsfromtheeye.Asshownin
Figure2.36,theobjectatAsubtendsalargeranglefromtheeyethanwhenitispositionatpointB.Thus,theobjectatA
formsalargerimageontheretina(see OA′)thanwhenitispositionedatB(see OB′).Thus,objectsthatsubtendlarge
angles from the eye appear larger because they form larger images on the retina.
Figure 2.36 Size perceived by an eye is determined by the angle subtended by the object. An
image formed on the retina by an object atAis larger than an image formed on the retina by the
same object positioned atB(compared image heights OA′ to OB′).
Wehaveseenthat,whenanobjectisplacedwithinafocallengthofaconvexlens,itsimageisvirtual,upright,andlarger
thantheobject(seepart(b)ofFigure2.26).Thus,whensuchanimageproducedbyaconvexlensservesastheobjectfor
theeye,asshowninFigure2.37,theimageontheretinaisenlarged,becausetheimageproducedbythelenssubtendsa
largerangleintheeyethandoestheobject.Aconvexlensusedforthispurposeiscalledamagnifyingglassorasimple
magnifier.

92 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Figure 2.37 The simple magnifier is a convex lens used to produce an enlarged image of an object on the retina. (a) With no
convex lens, the object subtends an angle θ from the eye. (b) With the convex lens in place, the image produced by the
object
convex lens subtends an angle θ from the eye, with θ >θ . Thus, the image on the retina is larger with the
image image object
convex lens in place.
Toaccountforthemagnificationofamagnifyinglens,wecomparetheanglesubtendedbytheimage(createdbythelens)
with the angle subtended by the object (viewed with no lens), as shown in Figure 2.37. We assume that the object is
situatedatthenearpointoftheeye,becausethisistheobjectdistanceatwhichtheunaidedeyecanformthelargestimage
ontheretina.Wewillcomparethemagnifiedimagescreatedbyalenswiththismaximumimagesizefortheunaidedeye.
ThemagnificationofanimagewhenobservedbytheeyeistheangularmagnificationM,whichisdefinedbytheratioof
the angle θ subtended by the image to the angle θ subtended by the object:
image object
θ (2.26)
M = image .
θ
object
Consider the situation shown in Figure 2.37. The magnifying lens is held a distance ℓ from the eye, and the image
producedbythemagnifierformsadistanceLfromtheeye.Wewanttocalculatetheangularmagnificationforanyarbitrary
Land ℓ.Inthesmall-angleapproximation,theangularsize θ oftheimageis h/L.Theangularsize θ ofthe
image i object
object at the near point is θ
object
=h o/25cm. The angular magnification is then
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 93
M = θ image = h i (25cm) . (2.27)
θ Lh
object o
UsingEquation 2.8for linear magnification
d h
m=− i = i
d h
o o
and the thin-lens equation
1 1 1
+ =
d d f
o i
inEquation 2.27, we arrive at the following expression for the angular magnification of a magnifying lens:
M =
⎛
−
d
i
⎞⎛25cm⎞ (2.28)
⎝ d ⎠⎝ L ⎠
o
=−d
⎛
1 − 1
⎞⎛25cm⎞
i⎝f d ⎠⎝ L ⎠
i
=
⎛
1−
d
i
⎞⎛25cm⎞
⎝ f ⎠⎝ L ⎠
Frompart(b)ofthefigure,weseethattheabsolutevalueoftheimagedistanceis |d|=L−ℓ.Notethat d <0 because
i i
the image is virtual, so we can dispense with the absolute value by explicitly inserting the minus sign: −d =L−ℓ.
i
Inserting this intoEquation 2.28gives us the final equation for the angular magnification of a magnifying lens:
M =
⎛25cm⎞⎛
1+
L−ℓ ⎞
.
(2.29)
⎝ L ⎠⎝ f ⎠
Notethatallthequantitiesinthisequationhavetobeexpressedincentimeters.Often,wewanttheimagetobeatthenear-
pointdistance(L=25cm)togetmaximummagnification,andweholdthemagnifyinglensclosetotheeye(ℓ=0).In
this case,Equation 2.29gives
M =1+ 25cm (2.30)
f
whichshowsthatthegreatestmagnificationoccursforthelenswiththeshortestfocallength.Inaddition,whentheimageis
atthenear-pointdistanceandthelensisheldclosetotheeye (ℓ=0),then L=d =25cm andEquation2.27becomes
i
h (2.31)
M = i =m
h
o
wheremisthelinearmagnification(Equation2.32)derivedforsphericalmirrorsandthinlenses.Anotherusefulsituation
is when the image is at infinity (L=∞).Equation 2.29then takes the form
M(L=∞)= 25cm . (2.32)
f
The resulting magnification is simply the ratio of the near-point distance to the focal length of the magnifying lens, so
a lens with a shorter focal length gives a stronger magnification. Although this magnification is smaller by 1 than the
magnificationobtainedwiththeimageatthenearpoint,itprovidesforthemostcomfortableviewingconditions,because
the eye is relaxed when viewing a distant object.
BycomparingEquation2.29withEquation2.32,weseethattherangeofangularmagnificationofagivenconverging
lens is

94 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
25cm ≤M ≤1+ 25cm . (2.33)
f f
Example 2.10
Magnifying a Diamond
Ajewelerwishestoinspecta3.0-mm-diameterdiamondwithamagnifier.Thediamondisheldatthejeweler’s
near point (25 cm), and the jeweler holds the magnifying lens close to his eye.
(a) What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to see a 15-mm-diameter image of the diamond?
(b) What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to obtain 10× magnification?
Strategy
Weneedtodeterminetherequisitemagnificationofthemagnifier.Becausethejewelerholdsthemagnifyinglens
close to his eye, we can useEquation 2.30to find the focal length of the magnifying lens.
Solution
a. The required linear magnification is the ratio of the desired image diameter to the diamond’s actual
diameter(Equation2.32).Becausethejewelerholdsthemagnifyinglensclosetohiseyeandtheimage
forms at his near point, the linear magnification is the same as the angular magnification, so
h
M =m= i = 15mm =5.0.
h 3.0mm
o
ThefocallengthfofthemagnifyinglensmaybecalculatedbysolvingEquation2.30forf,whichgives
M =1+ 25cm
f
f = 25cm = 25cm =6.3cm
M−1 5.0−1
b. Togetanimagemagnifiedbyafactoroften,weagainsolveEquation2.30forf,butthistimeweuse
M =10. The result is
f = 25cm = 25cm =2.8cm.
M−1 10−1
Significance
Notethatagreatermagnificationisachievedbyusingalenswithasmallerfocallength.Wethusneedtousea
lenswithradiiofcurvaturethatarelessthanafewcentimetersandholditveryclosetooureye.Thisisnotvery
convenient. A compound microscope, explored in the following section, can overcome this drawback.
2.8 | Microscopes and Telescopes
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the physics behind the operation of microscopes and telescopes
• Describe the image created by these instruments and calculate their magnifications
Microscopesandtelescopesaremajorinstrumentsthathavecontributedhugelytoourcurrentunderstandingofthemicro-
and macroscopic worlds. The invention of these devices led to numerous discoveries in disciplines such as physics,
astronomy, and biology, to name a few. In this section, we explain the basic physics that make these instruments work.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 95
Microscopes
Althoughtheeyeismarvelousinitsabilitytoseeobjectslargeandsmall,itobviouslyislimitedinthesmallestdetailsit
can detect. The desire to see beyond what is possible with the naked eye led to the use of optical instruments. We have
seenthatasimpleconvexlenscancreateamagnifiedimage,butitishardtogetlargemagnificationwithsuchalens.A
magnificationgreaterthan 5× isdifficultwithoutdistortingtheimage.Togethighermagnification,wecancombinethe
simplemagnifyingglasswithoneormoreadditionallenses.Inthissection,weexaminemicroscopesthatenlargethedetails
that we cannot see with the naked eye.
Microscopes were first developed in the early 1600sbyeyeglass makers in The Netherlands and Denmark. The simplest
compoundmicroscopeisconstructedfromtwoconvexlenses(Figure2.38).Theobjectivelensisaconvexlensofshort
focallength(i.e.,highpower)withtypicalmagnificationfrom 5× to 100× .Theeyepiece,alsoreferredtoastheocular,
is a convex lens of longer focal length.
The purpose of a microscope is to create magnified images of small objects, and both lenses contribute to the final
magnification.Also,thefinalenlargedimageisproducedsufficientlyfarfromtheobservertobeeasilyviewed,sincethe
eye cannot focus on objects or images that are too close (i.e., closer than the near point of the eye).
Figure 2.38 A compound microscope is composed of two lenses: an objective and an eyepiece. The objective forms the first
image, which is larger than the object. This first image is inside the focal length of the eyepiece and serves as the object for the
eyepiece. The eyepiece forms final image that is further magnified.
ToseehowthemicroscopeinFigure2.38formsanimage,consideritstwolensesinsuccession.Theobjectisjustbeyond
thefocallength f obj oftheobjectivelens,producingareal,invertedimagethatislargerthantheobject.Thisfirstimage
serves as the object forthe second lens, oreyepiece. The eyepiece is positioned so that the first image is within its focal
length f eye,sothatitcanfurthermagnifytheimage.Inasense,itactsasamagnifyingglassthatmagnifiestheintermediate
imageproducedbytheobjective.Theimageproducedbytheeyepieceisamagnifiedvirtualimage.Thefinalimageremains
inverted but is farther from the observer than the object, making it easy to view.
Theeyeviewsthevirtualimagecreatedbytheeyepiece,whichservesastheobjectforthelensintheeye.Thevirtualimage
formed by the eyepiece is well outside the focal length of the eye, so the eye forms a real image on the retina.
The magnification of the microscope is the product of the linear magnification m obj by the objective and the angular
magnification M eye by the eyepiece. These are given by