# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 423-427
############################################################

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 413
muchfaster.Theoperationofcircuitbreakersisnotwithinthescopeofthischapterandwillbediscussedinlaterchapters.
Another method of protecting equipment and people is the ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI), which is common in
bathroomsandkitchens.TheGFCIoutletsrespondveryquicklytochangesincurrent.Theseoutletsopenwhenthereisa
change in magnetic field produced by current-carrying conductors, which is also beyond the scope of this chapter and is
covered in a later chapter.
The Cost of Electricity
Themoreelectricappliancesyouuseandthelongertheyarelefton,thehigheryourelectricbill.Thisfamiliarfactisbased
dE
on the relationship between energy and power. You pay for the energy used. Since P= , we see that
dt
E=∫Pdt
is the energy used by a device using power P for a time interval t. If power is delivered at a constant rate, then then the
energycanbefoundby E=Pt.Forexample,themorelightbulbsburning,thegreaterPused;thelongertheyareon,the
greatertis.
The energy unit on electric bills is the kilowatt-hour (kW·h), consistent with the relationship E=Pt. It is easy to
estimate the cost of operating electrical appliances if you have some idea of their power consumption rate in watts or
kilowatts, the time they are on in hours, and the cost per kilowatt-hour for your electric utility. Kilowatt-hours, like
all other specialized energy units such as food calories, can be converted into joules. You can prove to yourself that
1kW·h=3.6×10 6 J.
The electrical energy (E) used can be reduced either by reducing the time of use or by reducing the power consumption
of that appliance or fixture. This not only reduces the cost but also results in a reduced impact on the environment.
Improvements to lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the electrical energy used in a home or business. About
20%ofahome’suseofenergygoestolighting,andthenumberforcommercialestablishmentsiscloserto40%.Fluorescent
lights are about four times more efficient than incandescent lights—this is true for both the long tubes and the compact
fluorescentlights(CFLs).(SeeFigure9.23(b).)Thus,a60-Wincandescentbulbcanbereplacedbya15-WCFL,which
hasthesamebrightnessandcolor.CFLshaveabenttubeinsideaglobeoraspiral-shapedtube,allconnectedtoastandard
screw-in base that fits standard incandescent light sockets. (Original problems with color, flicker, shape, and high initial
investment for CFLs have been addressed in recent years.)
The heat transfer from these CFLs is less, and they last up to 10 times longer than incandescent bulbs. The significance
ofaninvestmentinsuchbulbsisaddressedinthenextexample.NewwhiteLEDlights(whichareclustersofsmallLED
bulbs) are even more efficient (twice that of CFLs) and last five times longer than CFLs.
Example 9.10
Calculating the Cost Effectiveness of LED Bulb
Thetypicalreplacementfora100-Wincandescentbulbisa20-WLEDbulb.The20-WLEDbulbcanprovide
thesameamountoflightoutputasthe100-Wincandescentlightbulb.WhatisthecostsavingsforusingtheLED
bulbinplaceoftheincandescentbulbforoneyear,assuming$0.10perkilowatt-houristheaverageenergyrate
charged by the power company? Assume that the bulb is turned on for three hours a day.
Strategy
(a) Calculate the energy used during the year for each bulb, using E=Pt.
(b) Multiply the energy by the cost.
Solution
a. Calculate the power for each bulb.
E =Pt=100W ⎛ 1kW ⎞⎛ 3h ⎞ ⎛365days⎞=109.5kW·h
Incandescent ⎝1000W⎠⎝day⎠⎝ ⎠
.
E =Pt=20W ⎛ 1kW ⎞⎛ 3h ⎞ ⎛365days⎞=21.90kW·h
LED ⎝1000W⎠⎝day⎠⎝ ⎠

414 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
b. Calculate the cost for each.
⎛$0.10⎞
cost =109.5kW-h =$10.95
Incandescent ⎝kW·h⎠
.
⎛$0.10⎞
cost =21.90kW-h =$2.19
LED ⎝kW·h⎠
Significance
ALEDbulbuses80%lessenergythantheincandescentbulb,saving$8.76overtheincandescentbulbforone
year.TheLEDbulbcancost$20.00andthe100-Wincandescentbulbcancost$0.75,whichshouldbecalculated
intothecomputation.Atypicallifespanofanincandescentbulbis1200hoursandis50,000hoursfortheLED
bulb.Theincandescentbulbwouldlast1.08yearsat3hoursadayandtheLEDbulbwouldlast45.66years.The
initialcostoftheLEDbulbishigh,butthecosttothehomeownerwillbe$0.69fortheincandescentbulbsversus
$0.44fortheLEDbulbsperyear.(NotethattheLEDbulbsarecomingdowninprice.)Thecostsavingsperyear
is approximately $8.50, and that is just for one bulb.
9.10 Check Your Understanding Is the efficiency of the various light bulbs the only consideration when
comparing the various light bulbs?
ChanginglightbulbsfromincandescentbulbstoCFLorLEDbulbsisasimplewaytoreduceenergyconsumptioninhomes
andcommercialsites.CFLbulbsoperatewithamuchdifferentmechanismthandoincandescentlights.Themechanismis
complexandbeyondthescopeofthischapter,buthereisaverygeneraldescriptionofthemechanism.CFLbulbscontain
argon and mercury vapor housed within a spiral-shaped tube. The CFL bulbs use a “ballast” that increases the voltage
usedbytheCFLbulb.Theballastproduceanelectricalcurrent,whichpassesthroughthegasmixtureandexcitesthegas
molecules. The excited gas molecules produce ultraviolet (UV) light, which in turn stimulates the fluorescent coating on
theinsideofthetube.Thiscoatingfluorescesinthevisiblespectrum,emittingvisiblelight.Traditionalfluorescenttubes
andCFLbulbshadashorttimedelayofuptoafewsecondswhilethemixturewasbeing“warmedup”andthemolecules
reached an excited state. It should be noted that these bulbs do contain mercury, which is poisonous, but if the bulb is
broken,themercuryisneverreleased.Evenifthebulbisbroken,themercurytendstoremaininthefluorescentcoating.
The amount is also quite small and the advantage of the energy saving may outweigh the disadvantage of using mercury.
The CFL light bulbs are being replaced with LED light bulbs, where LED stands for “light-emitting diode.” The diode
was briefly discussed as a nonohmic device, made of semiconducting material, which essentially permits current flow in
onedirection.LEDsareaspecialtypeofdiodemadeofsemiconductingmaterialsinfusedwithimpuritiesincombinations
and concentrations that enable the extra energy from the movement of the electrons during electrical excitation to be
convertedintovisiblelight.SemiconductingdeviceswillbeexplainedingreaterdetailinCondensed Matter Physics
(http://cnx.org/content/m58591/latest/).
Commercial LEDs are quickly becoming the standard for commercial and residential lighting, replacing incandescent
and CFL bulbs. They are designed for the visible spectrum and are constructed from gallium doped with arsenic and
phosphorousatoms.ThecoloremittedfromanLEDdependsonthematerialsusedinthesemiconductorandthecurrent.In
theearlyyearsofLEDdevelopment,smallLEDsfoundoncircuitboardswerered,green,andyellow,butLEDlightbulbs
can now be programmed to produce millions of colors of light as well as many different hues of white light.
Comparison of Incandescent, CFL, and LED Light Bulbs
The energy savings can be significant when replacing an incandescent light bulb or a CFL light bulb with an LED light.
Lightbulbsareratedbytheamountofpowerthatthebulbconsumes,andtheamountoflightoutputismeasuredinlumens.
Thelumen(lm)istheSI-derivedunitofluminousfluxandisameasureofthetotalquantityofvisiblelightemittedbya
source.A60-Wincandescentlightbulbcanbereplacedwitha13-to15-WCFLbulbora6-to8-WLEDbulb,allthreeof
whichhavealightoutputofapproximately800lm.Atableoflightoutputforsomecommonlyusedlightbulbsappearsin
Table 9.2.
Thelifespansofthethreetypesofbulbsaresignificantlydifferent.AnLEDbulbhasalifespanof50,000hours,whereas
the CFL has a lifespan of 8000 hours and the incandescent lasts a mere 1200 hours. The LED bulb is the most durable,
easily withstanding rough treatment such as jarring and bumping. The incandescent light bulb has little tolerance to the
sametreatmentsincethefilamentandglasscaneasilybreak.TheCFLbulbisalsolessdurablethantheLEDbulbbecause
ofitsglassconstruction.Theamountofheatemittedis3.4btu/hforthe8-WLEDbulb,85btu/hforthe60-Wincandescent
bulb,and30btu/hfortheCFLbulb.Asmentionedearlier,amajordrawbackoftheCFLbulbisthatitcontainsmercury,a
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 415
neurotoxin,andmustbedisposedofashazardouswaste.Fromthesedata,itiseasytounderstandwhytheLEDlightbulb
is quickly becoming the standard in lighting.
Light Output LED Light Bulbs Incandescent Light Bulbs CFL Light Bulbs
(lumens) (watts) (watts) (watts)
450 4−5 40 9−13
800 6−8 60 13−15
1100 9−13 75 18−25
1600 16−20 100 23−30
2600 25−28 150 30−55
Table 9.2Light Output of LED, Incandescent, and CFL Light Bulbs
Summary of Relationships
In this chapter, we have discussed relationships between voltages, current, resistance, and power. Figure 9.26 shows a
summary of the relationships between these measurable quantities for ohmic devices. (Recall that ohmic devices follow
Ohm’s law V =IR.) For example, if you need to calculate the power, use the pink section, which shows that P=VI,
P=
V2
, and P=I2R.
R
Figure 9.26 This circle shows a summary of the equations for
the relationships between power, current, voltage, and
resistance.
Whichequationyouusedependsonwhatvaluesyouaregiven,oryoumeasure.Forexampleifyouaregiventhecurrent
andtheresistance,use P=I2R.Althoughallthepossiblecombinationsmayseemoverwhelming,don’tforgetthatthey
all are combinations of just two equations, Ohm’s law (V =IR) and power (P=IV).
9.6 | Superconductors
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the phenomenon of superconductivity
• List applications of superconductivity

416 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
Touch the power supply of your laptop computer or some other device. It probably feels slightly warm. That heat is an
unwantedbyproductoftheprocessofconvertinghouseholdelectricpowerintoacurrentthatcanbeusedbyyourdevice.
Althoughelectricpowerisreasonablyefficient,otherlossesareassociatedwithit.Asdiscussedinthesectiononpowerand
energy, transmission of electric power produces I2R line losses. These line losses exist whether the power is generated
from conventional power plants (using coal, oil, orgas), nuclear plants, solar plants, hydroelectric plants, orwind farms.
These losses can be reduced, but not eliminated, by transmitting using a higher voltage. It would be wonderful if these
line losses could be eliminated, but that would require transmission lines that have zero resistance. In a world that has a
globalinterestinnotwastingenergy,thereductionoreliminationofthisunwantedthermalenergywouldbeasignificant
achievement. Is this possible?
The Resistance of Mercury
In 1911, Heike Kamerlingh Onnes of Leiden University, a Dutch physicist, was looking at the temperature dependence
of the resistance of the element mercury. He cooled the sample of mercury and noticed the familiar behavior of a linear
dependence of resistance on temperature; as the temperature decreased, the resistance decreased. Kamerlingh Onnes
continued to cool the sample of mercury, using liquid helium. As the temperature approached 4.2K(−269.2°C), the
resistanceabruptlywenttozero(Figure 9.27).Thistemperatureisknownasthecriticaltemperature T formercury.
c
The sample of mercury entered into a phase where the resistance was absolutely zero. This phenomenon is known as
superconductivity. (Note: If you connect the leads of a three-digit ohmmeter across a conductor, the reading commonly
showsupas 0.00Ω.Theresistanceoftheconductorisnotactuallyzero,itislessthan 0.01Ω.)Therearevariousmethods
tomeasureverysmallresistances,suchasthefour-pointmethod,butanohmmeterisnotanacceptablemethodtousefor
testing resistance in superconductivity.
Figure 9.27 The resistance of a sample of mercury is zero at
very low temperatures—it is a superconductor up to the
temperature of about 4.2 K. Above that critical temperature, its
resistance makes a sudden jump and then increases nearly
linearly with temperature.
Other Superconducting Materials
As research continued, several other materials were found to enter a superconducting phase, when the temperature
reached near absolute zero. In 1941, an alloy of niobium-nitride was found that could become superconducting at
T c=16K(−257°C) andin1953,vanadium-siliconwasfoundtobecomesuperconductiveat T c=17.5K(−255.7°C).
The temperatures for the transition into superconductivity were slowly creeping higher. Strangely, many materials that
make good conductors, such as copper, silver, and gold, do not exhibit superconductivity. Imagine the energy savings if
transmission lines for electric power-generating stations could be made to be superconducting at temperatures near room
temperature! A resistance of zero ohms means no I2R losses and a great boost to reducing energy consumption. The
problemisthat T c=17.5K isstillverycoldandintherangeofliquidheliumtemperatures.Atthistemperature,itisnot
cost effective to transmit electrical energy because of the cooling requirements.
Alargejumpwasseenin1986,whenateamofresearchers,headedbyDr.ChingWuChuofHoustonUniversity,fabricated
a brittle, ceramic compound with a transition temperature of T c=92K(−181°C). The ceramic material, composed
of yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO), was an insulator at room temperature. Although this temperature still seems
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9