# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 85-93
############################################################

2.4 • Products of Vectors 73
the direction of vector . (c) The orthogonal projection of vector onto the direction of vector .
EXAMPLE 2.15
The Scalar Product
For the vectors shown in Figure 2.13, find the scalar product .
Strategy
From Figure 2.13, the magnitudes of vectors and are A = 10.0 and F = 20.0. Angle , between them, is the
difference: . Substituting these values into Equation 2.27 gives the scalar product.
Solution
A straightforward calculation gives us
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.11
For the vectors given in Figure 2.13, find the scalar products and .
In the Cartesian coordinate system, scalar products of the unit vector of an axis with other unit vectors of axes
always vanish because these unit vectors are orthogonal:
2.29
In these equations, we use the fact that the magnitudes of all unit vectors are one: . For unit
vectors of the axes, Equation 2.28 gives the following identities:
2.30
The scalar product can also be interpreted as either the product of B with the projection of vector onto
the direction of vector (Figure 2.27(b)) or the product of A with the projection of vector onto the direction of
vector (Figure 2.27(c)):
For example, in the rectangular coordinate system in a plane, the scalar x-component of a vector is its dot product
with the unit vector , and the scalar y-component of a vector is its dot product with the unit vector :
Scalar multiplication of vectors is commutative,
2.31
and obeys the distributive law:

74 2 • Vectors
2.32
We can use the commutative and distributive laws to derive various relations for vectors, such as expressing the dot
product of two vectors in terms of their scalar components.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.12
For vector in a rectangular coordinate system, use Equation 2.29 through Equation 2.32 to
show that , , and .
When the vectors in Equation 2.27 are given in their vector component forms,
we can compute their scalar product as follows:
Since scalar products of two different unit vectors of axes give zero, and scalar products of unit vectors with
themselves give one (see Equation 2.29 and Equation 2.30), there are only three nonzero terms in this expression.
Thus, the scalar product simplifies to
2.33
We can use Equation 2.33 for the scalar product in terms of scalar components of vectors to find the angle between
two vectors. When we divide Equation 2.27 by AB, we obtain the equation for , into which we substitute
Equation 2.33:
2.34
Angle between vectors and is obtained by taking the inverse cosine of the expression in Equation 2.34.
EXAMPLE 2.16
Angle between Two Forces
Three dogs are pulling on a stick in different directions, as shown in Figure 2.28. The first dog pulls with force
, the second dog pulls with force , and the third dog pulls
with force . What is the angle between forces and ?
Access for free at openstax.org

2.4 • Products of Vectors 75
FIGURE 2.28 Three dogs are playing with a stick.
Strategy
The components of force vector are , , and , whereas those of force
vector are , , and . Computing the scalar product of these vectors and
their magnitudes, and substituting into Equation 2.34 gives the angle of interest.
Solution
The magnitudes of forces and are
and
Substituting the scalar components into Equation 2.33 yields the scalar product
Finally, substituting everything into Equation 2.34 gives the angle
Significance
Notice that when vectors are given in terms of the unit vectors of axes, we can find the angle between them without
knowing the specifics about the geographic directions the unit vectors represent. Here, for example, the
+x-direction might be to the east and the +y-direction might be to the north. But, the angle between the forces in
the problem is the same if the +x-direction is to the west and the +y-direction is to the south.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.13
Find the angle between forces and in Example 2.16.

76 2 • Vectors
EXAMPLE 2.17
The Work of a Force
When force pulls on an object and when it causes its displacement , we say the force performs work. The
amount of work the force does is the scalar product . If the stick in Example 2.16 moves momentarily and gets
displaced by vector , how much work is done by the third dog in Example 2.16?
Strategy
We compute the scalar product of displacement vector with force vector , which is the pull
from the third dog. Let’s use to denote the work done by force on displacement .
Solution
Calculating the work is a straightforward application of the dot product:
Significance
The SI unit of work is called the joule , where 1 J = 1 . The unit can be written as
, so the answer can be expressed as .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.14
How much work is done by the first dog and by the second dog in Example 2.16 on the displacement in Example
2.17?
The Vector Product of Two Vectors (the Cross Product)
Vector multiplication of two vectors yields a vector product.
VECTOR PRODUCT (CROSS PRODUCT)
The vector product of two vectors and is denoted by and is often referred to as a cross product.
The vector product is a vector that has its direction perpendicular to both vectors and . In other words,
vector is perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and , as shown in Figure 2.29. The
magnitude of the vector product is defined as
2.35
where angle , between the two vectors, is measured from vector (first vector in the product) to vector
(second vector in the product), as indicated in Figure 2.29, and is between and .
According to Equation 2.35, the vector product vanishes for pairs of vectors that are either parallel or
antiparallel because .
Access for free at openstax.org

2.4 • Products of Vectors 77
FIGURE 2.29 The vector product of two vectors is drawn in three-dimensional space. (a) The vector product is a vector
perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and . Small squares drawn in perspective mark right angles between and , and
between and so that if and lie on the floor, vector points vertically upward to the ceiling. (b) The vector product is a
vector antiparallel to vector .
On the line perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and there are two alternative directions—either up
or down, as shown in Figure 2.29—and the direction of the vector product may be either one of them. In the
standard right-handed orientation, where the angle between vectors is measured counterclockwise from the first
vector, vector points upward, as seen in Figure 2.29(a). If we reverse the order of multiplication, so that now
comes first in the product, then vector must point downward, as seen in Figure 2.29(b). This means that
vectors and are antiparallel to each other and that vector multiplication is not commutative but
anticommutative. The anticommutative property means the vector product reverses the sign when the order of
multiplication is reversed:
2.36
The corkscrew right-hand rule is a common mnemonic used to determine the direction of the vector product. As
shown in Figure 2.30, a corkscrew is placed in a direction perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and ,
and its handle is turned in the direction from the first to the second vector in the product. The direction of the cross
product is given by the progression of the corkscrew.
You can also use your right hand, without the use of a corkscrew, by positioning your right hand so that your fingers
point in the direction of A and they curl toward B. The cross product must be perpendicular to both A and B, and so
you are choosing from only two possible directions. Your thumb now points toward the correct choice.

78 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.30 The corkscrew right-hand rule can be used to determine the direction of the cross product . Place a corkscrew in the
direction perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and , and turn it in the direction from the first to the second vector in the
product. The direction of the cross product is given by the progression of the corkscrew. (a) Upward movement means the cross-product
vector points up. (b) Downward movement means the cross-product vector points downward. (c) To find the direction of C = A × B using
your right hand (be careful not to use your left hand or you will get the opposite direction!), with A and B placed tail-to-tail, position your
right hand so that your fingers point in the direction of A and curl them toward B. Your extended thumb will point in the direction of the
cross product. Make sure your thumb is perpendicular to the plan defined by the two crossed vectors, A and B.
EXAMPLE 2.18
The Torque of a Force
The mechanical advantage that a familiar tool called a wrench provides (Figure 2.31) depends on magnitude F of the
applied force, on its direction with respect to the wrench handle, and on how far from the nut this force is applied.
The distance R from the nut to the point where force vector is attached is represented by the radial vector . The
physical vector quantity that makes the nut turn is called torque (denoted by , and it is the vector product of the
distance between the pivot to force with the force: .
To loosen a rusty nut, a 20.00-N force is applied to the wrench handle at angle and at a distance of 0.25 m
from the nut, as shown in Figure 2.31(a). Find the magnitude and direction of the torque applied to the nut. What
would the magnitude and direction of the torque be if the force were applied at angle , as shown in Figure
2.31(b)? For what value of angle does the torque have the largest magnitude?
Access for free at openstax.org

2.4 • Products of Vectors 79
FIGURE 2.31 A wrench provides grip and mechanical advantage in applying torque to turn a nut. (a) Turn counterclockwise to loosen the
nut. (b) Turn clockwise to tighten the nut.
Strategy
We adopt the frame of reference shown in Figure 2.31, where vectors and lie in the xy-plane and the origin is at
the position of the nut. The radial direction along vector (pointing away from the origin) is the reference direction
for measuring the angle because is the first vector in the vector product . Vector must lie along
the z-axis because this is the axis that is perpendicular to the xy-plane, where both and lie. To compute the
magnitude , we use Equation 2.35. To find the direction of , we use the corkscrew right-hand rule (Figure 2.30).
Solution
For the situation in (a), the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the positive direction of the z-axis.
Physically, it means the torque vector points out of the page, perpendicular to the wrench handle. We identify F =
20.00 N and R = 0.25 m, and compute the magnitude using Equation 2.35:
For the situation in (b), the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the negative direction of the z-axis.
Physically, it means the vector points into the page, perpendicular to the wrench handle. The magnitude of this
torque is
The torque has the largest value when , which happens when . Physically, it means the wrench is
most effective—giving us the best mechanical advantage—when we apply the force perpendicular to the wrench
handle. For the situation in this example, this best-torque value is .
Significance
When solving mechanics problems, we often do not need to use the corkscrew rule at all, as we’ll see now in the
following equivalent solution. Notice that once we have identified that vector lies along the z-axis, we can
write this vector in terms of the unit vector of the z-axis:
In this equation, the number that multiplies is the scalar z-component of the vector . In the computation of
this component, care must be taken that the angle is measured counterclockwise from (first vector) to

80 2 • Vectors
(second vector). Following this principle for the angles, we obtain for the situation in
(a), and we obtain for the situation in (b). In the latter case, the angle is negative
because the graph in Figure 2.31 indicates the angle is measured clockwise; but, the same result is obtained when
this angle is measured counterclockwise because and . In this
way, we obtain the solution without reference to the corkscrew rule. For the situation in (a), the solution is
; for the situation in (b), the solution is .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.15
For the vectors given in Figure 2.13, find the vector products and .
Similar to the dot product (Equation 2.32), the cross product has the following distributive property:
2.37
The distributive property is applied frequently when vectors are expressed in their component forms, in terms of
unit vectors of Cartesian axes.
When we apply the definition of the cross product, Equation 2.35, to unit vectors , , and that define the positive
x-, y-, and z-directions in space, we find that
2.38
All other cross products of these three unit vectors must be vectors of unit magnitudes because , , and are
orthogonal. For example, for the pair and , the magnitude is . The direction of
the vector product must be orthogonal to the xy-plane, which means it must be along the z-axis. The only unit
vectors along the z-axis are or . By the corkscrew rule, the direction of vector must be parallel to the
positive z-axis. Therefore, the result of the multiplication is identical to . We can repeat similar reasoning
for the remaining pairs of unit vectors. The results of these multiplications are
2.39
Notice that in Equation 2.39, the three unit vectors , , and appear in the cyclic order shown in a diagram in
Figure 2.32(a). The cyclic order means that in the product formula, follows and comes before , or follows
and comes before , or follows and comes before . The cross product of two different unit vectors is always a
third unit vector. When two unit vectors in the cross product appear in the cyclic order, the result of such a
multiplication is the remaining unit vector, as illustrated in Figure 2.32(b). When unit vectors in the cross product
appear in a different order, the result is a unit vector that is antiparallel to the remaining unit vector (i.e., the result is
with the minus sign, as shown by the examples in Figure 2.32(c) and Figure 2.32(d). In practice, when the task is to
find cross products of vectors that are given in vector component form, this rule for the cross-multiplication of unit
vectors is very useful.
Access for free at openstax.org