# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 443-450
############################################################

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 433
Figure 10.2 A variety of voltage sources. (a) The Brazos Wind Farm in Fluvanna, Texas; (b) the Krasnoyarsk Dam in Russia;
(c) a solar farm; (d) a group of nickel metal hydride batteries. The voltage output of each device depends on its construction and
load. The voltage output equals emf only if there is no load. (credit a: modification of work by Stig Nygaard; credit b:
modification of work by "vadimpl"/Wikimedia Commons; credit c: modification of work by "The tdog"/Wikimedia Commons;
credit d: modification of work by "Itrados"/Wikimedia Commons)
Iftheelectromotiveforceisnotaforceatall,thenwhatistheemfandwhatisasourceofemf?Toanswerthesequestions,
considerasimplecircuitofa12-Vlampattachedtoa12-Vbattery,asshowninFigure10.3.Thebatterycanbemodeled
asatwo-terminaldevicethatkeepsoneterminalatahigherelectricpotentialthanthesecondterminal.Thehigherelectric
potentialissometimescalledthepositiveterminalandislabeledwithaplussign.Thelower-potentialterminalissometimes
called the negative terminal and labeled with a minus sign. This is the source of the emf.
Figure 10.3 A source of emf maintains one terminal at a higher electric potential
than the other terminal, acting as a source of current in a circuit.

434 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
Whentheemfsourceisnotconnectedtothelamp,thereisnonetflowofchargewithintheemfsource.Oncethebatteryis
connectedtothelamp,chargesflowfromoneterminalofthebattery,throughthelamp(causingthelamptolight),andback
totheotherterminalofthebattery.Ifweconsiderpositive(conventional)currentflow,positivechargesleavethepositive
terminal, travel through the lamp, and enter the negative terminal.
Positivecurrentflowisusefulformostofthecircuitanalysisinthischapter,butinmetallicwiresandresistors,electrons
contributethemosttocurrent,flowingintheoppositedirectionofpositivecurrentflow.Therefore,itismorerealisticto
considerthemovementofelectronsfortheanalysisofthecircuitinFigure10.3.Theelectronsleavethenegativeterminal,
travelthroughthelamp,andreturntothepositiveterminal.Inorderfortheemfsourcetomaintainthepotentialdifference
betweenthetwoterminals,negativecharges(electrons)mustbemovedfromthepositiveterminaltothenegativeterminal.
The emf source acts as a charge pump, moving negative charges from the positive terminal to the negative terminal to
maintainthepotentialdifference.Thisincreasesthepotentialenergyofthechargesand,therefore,theelectricpotentialof
the charges.
Theforceonthenegativechargefromtheelectricfieldisintheoppositedirectionoftheelectricfield,asshowninFigure
10.3.Inorderforthenegativechargestobemovedtothenegativeterminal,workmustbedoneonthenegativecharges.
Thisrequiresenergy,whichcomesfromchemicalreactionsinthebattery.Thepotentialiskepthighonthepositiveterminal
and low on the negative terminal to maintain the potential difference between the two terminals. The emf is equal to the
⎛ dW⎞
workdoneonthechargeperunitcharge ε= whenthereisnocurrentflowing.Sincetheunitforworkisthejoule
⎝ dq⎠
and the unit for charge is the coulomb, the unit for emf is the volt (1V=1J/C).
Theterminalvoltage V ofabatteryisvoltagemeasuredacrosstheterminalsofthebatterywhenthereisnoload
terminal
connectedtotheterminal.Anidealbatteryisanemfsourcethatmaintainsaconstantterminalvoltage,independentofthe
currentbetweenthetwoterminals.Anidealbatteryhasnointernalresistance,andtheterminalvoltageisequaltotheemf
ofthebattery.Inthenextsection,wewillshowthatarealbatterydoeshaveinternalresistanceandtheterminalvoltageis
always less than the emf of the battery.
The Origin of Battery Potential
Thecombinationofchemicalsandthemakeupoftheterminalsinabatterydetermineitsemf.Theleadacidbatteryusedin
carsandothervehiclesisoneofthemostcommoncombinationsofchemicals.Figure10.4showsasinglecell(oneofsix)
ofthisbattery.Thecathode(positive)terminalofthecellisconnectedtoaleadoxideplate,whereastheanode(negative)
terminal is connected to a lead plate. Both plates are immersed in sulfuric acid, the electrolyte for the system.
Figure 10.4 Chemical reactions in a lead-acid cell separate charge,
sending negative charge to the anode, which is connected to the lead plates.
The lead oxide plates are connected to the positive or cathode terminal of
the cell. Sulfuric acid conducts the charge, as well as participates in the
chemical reaction.
Knowing a little about how the chemicals in a lead-acid battery interact helps in understanding the potential created by
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 435
thebattery.Figure 10.5showstheresultofasinglechemicalreaction.Twoelectronsareplacedontheanode,makingit
negative,providedthatthecathodesuppliestwoelectrons.Thisleavesthecathodepositivelycharged,becauseithaslost
two electrons. In short, a separation of charge has been driven by a chemical reaction.
Note that the reaction does not take place unless there is a complete circuit to allow two electrons to be supplied to the
cathode. Under many circumstances, these electrons come from the anode, flow through a resistance, and return to the
cathode.Notealsothatsincethechemicalreactionsinvolvesubstanceswithresistance,itisnotpossibletocreatetheemf
without an internal resistance.
Figure 10.5 In a lead-acid battery, two electrons are forced onto the
anode of a cell, and two electrons are removed from the cathode of the cell.
The chemical reaction in a lead-acid battery places two electrons on the
anode and removes two from the cathode. It requires a closed circuit to
proceed, since the two electrons must be supplied to the cathode.
Internal Resistance and Terminal Voltage
The amount of resistance to the flow of current within the voltage source is called the internal resistance. The internal
resistancerofabatterycanbehaveincomplexways.Itgenerallyincreasesasabatteryisdepleted,duetotheoxidationof
theplatesorthereductionoftheacidityoftheelectrolyte.However,internalresistancemayalsodependonthemagnitude
and direction of the current through a voltage source, its temperature, and even its history. The internal resistance of
rechargeablenickel-cadmiumcells,forexample,dependsonhowmanytimesandhowdeeplytheyhavebeendepleted.A
simple model for a battery consists of an idealized emf source ε and an internal resistancer(Figure 10.6).

436 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
Figure 10.6 A battery can be modeled as an idealized emf
(ε) with an internal resistance (r). The terminal voltage of the
battery is V =ε−Ir.
terminal
Supposeanexternalresistor,knownastheloadresistanceR,isconnectedtoavoltagesourcesuchasabattery,asinFigure
10.7.Thefigureshowsamodelofabatterywithanemf ε,aninternalresistancer,andaloadresistorRconnectedacross
its terminals. Using conventional current flow, positive charges leave the positive terminal of the battery, travel through
theresistor,andreturntothenegativeterminalofthebattery.Theterminalvoltageofthebatterydependsontheemf,the
internal resistance, and the current, and is equal to
V =ε−Ir. (10.1)
terminal
Foragivenemfandinternalresistance,theterminalvoltagedecreasesasthecurrentincreasesduetothepotentialdropIr
of the internal resistance.
Figure 10.7 Schematic of a voltage source and its load
resistorR. Since the internal resistanceris in series with the
load, it can significantly affect the terminal voltage and the
current delivered to the load.
AgraphofthepotentialdifferenceacrosseachelementthecircuitisshowninFigure 10.8.AcurrentIrunsthroughthe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 437
circuit,andthepotentialdropacrosstheinternalresistorisequaltoIr.Theterminalvoltageisequalto ε−Ir,whichis
equaltothepotentialdropacrosstheloadresistor IR=ε−Ir.Aswithpotentialenergy,itisthechangeinvoltagethat
isimportant.Whentheterm“voltage”isused,weassumethatitisactuallythechangeinthepotential,or ΔV.However,
Δ is often omitted for convenience.
Figure 10.8 A graph of the voltage through the circuit of a
battery and a load resistance. The electric potential increases the
emf of the battery due to the chemical reactions doing work on
the charges. There is a decrease in the electric potential in the
battery due to the internal resistance. The potential decreases
due to the internal resistance (−Ir), making the terminal
voltage of the battery equal to (ε−Ir). The voltage then
ε
decreases by (IR). The current is equal to I = .
r+R
ε
Thecurrentthroughtheloadresistoris I = .Weseefromthisexpressionthatthesmallertheinternalresistancer,the
r+R
greaterthecurrentthevoltagesourcesuppliestoitsloadR.Asbatteriesaredepleted,rincreases.Ifrbecomesasignificant
fraction of the load resistance, then the current is significantly reduced, as the following example illustrates.
Example 10.1
Analyzing a Circuit with a Battery and a Load
A given battery has a 12.00-V emf and an internal resistance of 0.100Ω. (a) Calculate its terminal voltage
when connected to a 10.00-Ω load. (b) What is the terminal voltage when connected to a 0.500-Ω load? (c)
Whatpowerdoesthe 0.500-Ω loaddissipate?(d)Iftheinternalresistancegrowsto 0.500Ω,findthecurrent,
terminal voltage, and power dissipated by a 0.500-Ω load.
Strategy
Theanalysisabovegaveanexpressionforcurrentwheninternalresistanceistakenintoaccount.Oncethecurrent
isfound,theterminalvoltagecanbecalculatedbyusingtheequation V =ε−Ir.Oncecurrentisfound,
terminal
we can also find the power dissipated by the resistor.
Solution
a. Enteringthegivenvaluesfortheemf,loadresistance,andinternalresistanceintotheexpressionabove
yields
I = ε = 12.00V =1.188A.
R+r 10.10Ω

438 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
Enter the known values into the equation V =ε−Ir to get the terminal voltage:
terminal
V =ε−Ir =12.00V −(1.188A)(0.100Ω)=11.90V.
terminal
Theterminalvoltagehereisonlyslightlylowerthantheemf,implyingthatthecurrentdrawnbythislight
load is not significant.
b. Similarly, with R =0.500Ω, the current is
load
I = ε = 12.00V =20.00A.
R+r 0.600Ω
The terminal voltage is now
V =ε−Ir =12.00V−(20.00A)(0.100Ω)=10.00V.
terminal
The terminal voltage exhibits a more significant reduction compared with emf, implying 0.500Ω is a
heavy load for this battery. A “heavy load” signifies a larger draw of current from the source but not a
larger resistance.
c. The power dissipated by the 0.500-Ω load can be found using the formula P=I2R. Entering the
known values gives
P=I2R=(20.0A)2(0.500Ω)=2.00×102 W.
V2
Notethatthispowercanalsobeobtainedusingtheexpression orIV,whereVistheterminalvoltage
R
(10.0 V in this case).
d. Here,theinternalresistancehasincreased,perhapsduetothedepletionofthebattery,tothepointwhere
itisasgreatastheloadresistance.Asbefore,wefirstfindthecurrentbyenteringtheknownvaluesinto
the expression, yielding
I = ε = 12.00V =12.00A.
R+r 1.00Ω
Now the terminal voltage is
V =ε−Ir =12.00V−(12.00A)(0.500Ω)=6.00V,
terminal
and the power dissipated by the load is
P=I2R=(12.00A)2(0.500Ω)=72.00W.
Weseethattheincreasedinternalresistancehassignificantlydecreasedtheterminalvoltage,current,and
power delivered to a load.
Significance
The internal resistance of a battery can increase for many reasons. For example, the internal resistance of a
rechargeablebatteryincreasesasthenumberoftimesthebatteryisrechargedincreases.Theincreasedinternal
resistancemayhavetwoeffectsonthebattery.First,theterminalvoltagewilldecrease.Second,thebatterymay
overheat due to the increased power dissipated by the internal resistance.
10.1 CheckYourUnderstandingIfyouplaceawiredirectlyacrossthetwoterminalofabattery,effectively
shorting out the terminals, the battery will begin to get hot. Why do you suppose this happens?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 439
Battery Testers
Batterytesters,suchasthoseinFigure 10.9,usesmallloadresistorstointentionallydrawcurrenttodeterminewhether
theterminalpotentialdropsbelowanacceptablelevel.Althoughitisdifficulttomeasuretheinternalresistanceofabattery,
batterytesterscanprovideameasurementoftheinternalresistanceofthebattery.Ifinternalresistanceishigh,thebattery
is weak, as evidenced by its low terminal voltage.
Figure 10.9 Battery testers measure terminal voltage under a load to determine the condition of a battery. (a) A US Navy
electronics technician uses a battery tester to test large batteries aboard the aircraft carrier USSNimitz. The battery tester she uses
has a small resistance that can dissipate large amounts of power. (b) The small device shown is used on small batteries and has a
digital display to indicate the acceptability of the terminal voltage. (credit a: modification of work by Jason A. Johnston; credit b:
modification of work by Keith Williamson)
Somebatteriescanberechargedbypassingacurrentthroughtheminthedirectionoppositetothecurrenttheysupplyto
anappliance.Thisisdoneroutinelyincarsandinbatteriesforsmallelectricalappliancesandelectronicdevices(Figure
10.10).Thevoltageoutputofthebatterychargermustbegreaterthantheemfofthebatterytoreversethecurrentthrough
it. This causes the terminal voltage of the battery to be greater than the emf, since V =ε−Ir andIis now negative.
Figure 10.10 A car battery charger reverses the normal direction of current through a
battery, reversing its chemical reaction and replenishing its chemical potential.
Itisimportanttounderstandtheconsequencesoftheinternalresistanceofemfsources,suchasbatteriesandsolarcells,but
often,theanalysisofcircuitsisdonewiththeterminalvoltageofthebattery,aswehavedoneintheprevioussections.The
terminalvoltageisreferredtoassimplyasV,droppingthesubscript“terminal.”Thisisbecausetheinternalresistanceof
the battery is difficult to measure directly and can change over time.