# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 244-250
############################################################

232 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
motion. Because object A is moving to the right, friction by B must act to the left. Object B is moving to the left relative to B, so the friction
by A on B is to the right. The friction force by object A on object B is the third law pair of the friction force by B on A, and therefore these two
forces must be in opposite directions. Because object B is sliding down the incline, the friction force by the ramp must oppose it and act up
the ramp.
We now include any force that acts on the body. Here, no applied force is present. The weight of the object acts as a
force pointing vertically downward, and the presence of the cord indicates a force of tension pointing away from the
object. Object A has one interface and hence experiences a normal force, directed away from the interface. The
source of this force is object B, and this normal force is labeled accordingly. Since object B s sliding down and object
A s sliding up with respect to the interface, so the friction is directed downward parallel to the inclined plane.
As noted in step 4 of the problem-solving strategy, we then construct the free-body diagram in Figure 5.32(b) using
the same approach. Object B experiences two normal forces and two friction forces due to the presence of two
contact surfaces. The interface with the inclined plane exerts external forces of and , and the interface with
object B exerts the normal force and friction ; is directed away from object B, and is opposing
the tendency of the relative motion of object B with respect to object A.
Significance
The object under consideration in each part of this problem was circled in gray. When you are first learning how to
draw free-body diagrams, you will find it helpful to circle the object before deciding what forces are acting on that
particular object. This focuses your attention, preventing you from considering forces that are not acting on the
body. If the objects were not sliding as described, we would need to know more about the strength of the tension
force in order to determine the directions of the friction forces.
EXAMPLE 5.15
Two Blocks in Contact
A force is applied to two blocks in contact, as shown. Draw the reaction forces between the two blocks.
Strategy
Draw a free-body diagram for each block. Be sure to consider Newton’s third law at the interface where the two
blocks touch.
Solution
Access for free at openstax.org

5.7 • Drawing Free-Body Diagrams 233
Significance
is the action force of block 2 on block 1. is the reaction force of block 1 on block 2. We use these free-body
diagrams in Applications of Newton’s Laws.
EXAMPLE 5.16
Block on the Table (Coupled Blocks)
A block rests on the table, as shown. A light rope is attached to it and runs over a pulley. The other end of the rope is
attached to a second block. The two blocks are said to be coupled. Block exerts a force due to its weight, which
causes the system (two blocks and a string) to accelerate.
Strategy
We assume that the string has no mass so that we do not have to consider it as a separate object. Draw a free-body
diagram for each block.
Solution
Significance
Each block accelerates (notice the labels shown for and ); however, assuming the string remains taut, the
magnitudes of acceleration are equal. Thus, we have . If we were to continue solving the problem, we
could simply call the acceleration . Also, we use two free-body diagrams because we are usually finding tension T,
which may require us to use a system of two equations in this type of problem. The tension is the same on both
.

234 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.10
(a) Draw the free-body diagram for the situation shown. (b) Redraw it showing components; use x-axes parallel to
the two ramps.
INTERACTIVE
Engage the simulation below to predict, qualitatively, how an external force will affect the speed and direction of an
object’s motion. Explain the effects with the help of a free-body diagram. Use free-body diagrams to draw position,
velocity, acceleration, and force graphs, and vice versa. Explain how the graphs relate to one another. Given a
scenario or a graph, sketch all four graphs.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21forcemotion)
Access for free at openstax.org

5 • Chapter Review 235
Chapter Review
Key Terms
dynamics study of how forces affect the motion of accelerate
objects and systems newton SI unit of force; 1 N is the force needed to
external force force acting on an object or system accelerate an object with a mass of 1 kg at a rate of
that originates outside of the object or system
force push or pull on an object with a specific Newton’s first law of motion body at rest remains at
magnitude and direction; can be represented by rest or, if in motion, remains in motion at constant
vectors or expressed as a multiple of a standard velocity unless acted on by a net external force; also
force known as the law of inertia
free fall situation in which the only force acting on an Newton’s second law of motion acceleration of a
object is gravity system is directly proportional to and in the same
free-body diagram sketch showing all external forces direction as the net external force acting on the
acting on an object or system; the system is system and is inversely proportional to its mass
represented by a single isolated point, and the Newton’s third law of motion whenever one body
forces are represented by vectors extending exerts a force on a second body, the first body
outward from that point experiences a force that is equal in magnitude and
Hooke’s law in a spring, a restoring force proportional opposite in direction to the force that it exerts
to and in the opposite direction of the imposed normal force force supporting the weight of an
displacement object, or a load, that is perpendicular to the surface
inertia ability of an object to resist changes in its of contact between the load and its support; the
motion surface applies this force to an object to support the
inertial reference frame reference frame moving at weight of the object
constant velocity relative to an inertial frame is also tension pulling force that acts along a stretched
inertial; a reference frame accelerating relative to an flexible connector, such as a rope or cable
inertial frame is not inertial thrust reaction force that pushes a body forward in
law of inertia see Newton’s first law of motion response to a backward force
net external force vector sum of all external forces weight force due to gravity acting on an object of
acting on an object or system; causes a mass to mass m
Key Equations
Net external force
Newton’s first law
Newton’s second law, vector form
Newton’s second law, scalar form
Newton’s second law, component form
Newton’s second law, momentum form
Definition of weight, vector form
Definition of weight, scalar form
Newton’s third law
Normal force on an object resting on a
horizontal surface, vector form
Normal force on an object resting on a
horizontal surface, scalar form
Normal force on an object resting on an
inclined plane, scalar form

236 5 • Chapter Review
Restoring force by a spring displaced by
x from the relaxed position
Tension in a cable supporting an object
of mass m at rest, scalar form
Summary
5.1 Forces 5.4 Mass and Weight
• Dynamics is the study of how forces affect the • Mass is the quantity of matter in a substance.
motion of objects, whereas kinematics simply • The weight of an object is the net force on a
describes the way objects move. falling object, or its gravitational force. The object
• Force is a push or pull that can be defined in experiences acceleration due to gravity.
terms of various standards, and it is a vector that • Some upward resistance force from the air acts
has both magnitude and direction. on all falling objects on Earth, so they can never
• External forces are any outside forces that act on truly be in free fall.
a body. A free-body diagram is a drawing of all • Careful distinctions must be made between free
external forces acting on a body. fall and weightlessness using the definition of
• The SI unit of force is the newton (N). weight as force due to gravity acting on an object
of a certain mass.
5.2 Newton's First Law
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
• According to Newton’s first law, there must be a
cause for any change in velocity (a change in • Newton’s third law of motion represents a basic
either magnitude or direction) to occur. This law symmetry in nature, with an experienced force
is also known as the law of inertia. equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to
• Friction is an external force that causes an object an exerted force.
to slow down. • Two equal and opposite forces do not cancel
• Inertia is the tendency of an object to remain at because they act on different systems.
rest or remain in motion. Inertia is related to an • Action-reaction pairs include a swimmer pushing
object’s mass. off a wall, helicopters creating lift by pushing air
• If an object’s velocity relative to a given frame is down, and an octopus propelling itself forward by
constant, then the frame is inertial. This means ejecting water from its body. Rockets, airplanes,
that for an inertial reference frame, Newton’s first and cars are pushed forward by a thrust reaction
law is valid. force.
• Equilibrium is achieved when the forces on a • Choosing a system is an important analytical step
system are balanced. in understanding the physics of a problem and
• A net force of zero means that an object is either solving it.
at rest or moving with constant velocity; that is, it
5.6 Common Forces
is not accelerating.
• When an object rests on a surface, the surface
5.3 Newton's Second Law
applies a force to the object that supports the
• An external force acts on a system from outside weight of the object. This supporting force acts
the system, as opposed to internal forces, which perpendicular to and away from the surface. It is
act between components within the system. called a normal force.
• Newton’s second law of motion says that the net • When an object rests on a nonaccelerating
external force on an object with a certain mass is horizontal surface, the magnitude of the normal
directly proportional to and in the same direction force is equal to the weight of the object.
as the acceleration of the object. • When an object rests on an inclined plane that
• Newton’s second law can also describe net force makes an angle with the horizontal surface, the
as the instantaneous rate of change of weight of the object can be resolved into
momentum. Thus, a net external force causes components that act perpendicular and parallel
nonzero acceleration. to the surface of the plane.
• The pulling force that acts along a stretched
flexible connector, such as a rope or cable, is
Access for free at openstax.org

5 • Chapter Review 237
called tension. When a rope supports the weight fictitious forces occur because the observer is in
of an object at rest, the tension in the rope is an accelerating or noninertial frame of reference.
equal to the weight of the object. If the object is
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
accelerating, tension is greater than weight, and
if it is accelerating opposite to the motion, • To draw a free-body diagram, we draw the object
tension is less than weight. of interest, draw all forces acting on that object,
• The force of friction is a force experienced by a and resolve all force vectors into x- and
moving object (or an object that has a tendency y-components. We must draw a separate free-
to move) parallel to the interface opposing the body diagram for each object in the problem.
motion (or its tendency). • A free-body diagram is a useful means of
• The force developed in a spring obeys Hooke’s describing and analyzing all the forces that act on
law, according to which its magnitude is a body to determine equilibrium according to
proportional to the displacement and has a sense Newton’s first law or acceleration according to
in the opposite direction of the displacement. Newton’s second law.
• Real forces have a physical origin, whereas
Conceptual Questions
5.1 Forces mass? Which is an intrinsic, unchanging property
of a body?
1 . What properties do forces have that allow us to
classify them as vectors? 7 . How much does a 70-kg astronaut weight in
space, far from any celestial body? What is her
5.2 Newton's First Law
mass at this location?
2 . Taking a frame attached to Earth as inertial,
8 . Which of the following statements is accurate?
which of the following objects cannot have
(a) Mass and weight are the same thing
inertial frames attached to them, and which are
expressed in different units.
inertial reference frames?
(b) If an object has no weight, it must have no
(a) A car moving at constant velocity
mass.
(b) A car that is accelerating
(c) If the weight of an object varies, so must the
(c) An elevator in free fall
mass.
(d) A space capsule orbiting Earth
(d) Mass and inertia are different concepts.
(e) An elevator descending uniformly
(e) Weight is always proportional to mass.
3 . A woman was transporting an open box of
9 . When you stand on Earth, your feet push against
cupcakes to a school party. The car in front of
it with a force equal to your weight. Why doesn’t
her stopped suddenly; she applied her brakes
Earth accelerate away from you?
immediately. She was wearing her seat belt and
suffered no physical harm (just a great deal of 10 . How would you give the value of in vector
embarrassment), but the cupcakes flew into the form?
dashboard and became “smushcakes.” Explain
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
what happened.
11 . Identify the action and reaction forces in the
5.3 Newton's Second Law
following situations: (a) Earth attracts the Moon,
4 . Why can we neglect forces such as those holding (b) a boy kicks a football, (c) a rocket accelerates
a body together when we apply Newton’s upward, (d) a car accelerates forward, (e) a high
second law? jumper leaps, and (f) a bullet is shot from a gun.
5 . A rock is thrown straight up. At the top of the 12 . Suppose that you are holding a cup of coffee in
trajectory, the velocity is momentarily zero. Does your hand. Identify all forces on the cup and the
this imply that the force acting on the object is reaction to each force.
zero? Explain your answer.
13 . (a) Why does an ordinary rifle recoil (kick
5.4 Mass and Weight backward) when fired? (b) The barrel of a
recoilless rifle is open at both ends. Describe
6 . What is the relationship between weight and
how Newton’s third law applies when one is