# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 544-552
############################################################

532 11 • Angular Momentum
So far, we have looked at the angular momentum of systems consisting of point particles and rigid bodies. We have
also analyzed the torques involved, using the expression that relates the external net torque to the change in
angular momentum, Equation 11.8. Examples of systems that obey this equation include a freely spinning bicycle
tire that slows over time due to torque arising from friction, or the slowing of Earth’s rotation over millions of years
due to frictional forces exerted on tidal deformations.
However, suppose there is no net external torque on the system, In this case, Equation 11.8 becomes the
law of conservation of angular momentum.
LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM
The angular momentum of a system of particles around a point in a fixed inertial reference frame is conserved if
there is no net external torque around that point:
11.10
or
11.11
Note that the total angular momentum is conserved. Any of the individual angular momenta can change as long as
their sum remains constant. This law is analogous to linear momentum being conserved when the external force on
a system is zero.
As an example of conservation of angular momentum, Figure 11.14 shows an ice skater executing a spin. The net
torque on her is very close to zero because there is relatively little friction between her skates and the ice. Also, the
friction is exerted very close to the pivot point. Both are small, so is negligible. Consequently, she can
spin for quite some time. She can also increase her rate of spin by pulling her arms and legs in. Why does pulling her
arms and legs in increase her rate of spin? The answer is that her angular momentum is constant, so that
or
where the primed quantities refer to conditions after she has pulled in her arms and reduced her moment of inertia.
Because is smaller, the angular velocity must increase to keep the angular momentum constant.
Access for free at openstax.org

11.3 • Conservation of Angular Momentum 533
FIGURE 11.14 (a) An ice skater is spinning on the tip of her skate with her arms extended. Her angular momentum is conserved because
the net torque on her is negligibly small. (b) Her rate of spin increases greatly when she pulls in her arms, decreasing her moment of inertia.
The work she does to pull in her arms results in an increase in rotational kinetic energy.
It is interesting to see how the rotational kinetic energy of the skater changes when she pulls her arms in. Her initial
rotational energy is
whereas her final rotational energy is
Since we can substitute for and find
​
Because her moment of inertia has decreased, her final rotational kinetic energy has increased. The source
of this additional rotational kinetic energy is the work required to pull her arms inward. Note that the skater’s arms
do not move in a perfect circle—they spiral inward. This work causes an increase in the rotational kinetic energy,
while her angular momentum remains constant. Since she is in a frictionless environment, no energy escapes the
system. Thus, if she were to extend her arms to their original positions, she would rotate at her original angular
velocity and her kinetic energy would return to its original value.
The solar system is another example of how conservation of angular momentum works in our universe. Our solar
system was born from a huge cloud of gas and dust that initially had rotational energy. Gravitational forces caused
the cloud to contract, and the rotation rate increased as a result of conservation of angular momentum (Figure
11.15).

534 11 • Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.15 The solar system coalesced from a cloud of gas and dust that was originally rotating. The orbital motions and spins of the
planets are in the same direction as the original spin and conserve the angular momentum of the parent cloud. (credit: modification of work
by NASA)
We continue our discussion with an example that has applications to engineering.
EXAMPLE 11.7
Coupled Flywheels
A flywheel rotates without friction at an angular velocity on a frictionless, vertical shaft of
negligible rotational inertia. A second flywheel, which is at rest and has a moment of inertia three times that of the
rotating flywheel, is dropped onto it (Figure 11.16). Because friction exists between the surfaces, the flywheels very
quickly reach the same rotational velocity, after which they spin together. (a) Use the law of conservation of angular
momentum to determine the angular velocity of the combination. (b) What fraction of the initial kinetic energy is
lost in the coupling of the flywheels?
Access for free at openstax.org

11.3 • Conservation of Angular Momentum 535
FIGURE 11.16 Two flywheels are coupled and rotate together.
Strategy
Part (a) is straightforward to solve for the angular velocity of the coupled system. We use the result of (a) to compare
the initial and final kinetic energies of the system in part (b).
Solution
a. No external torques act on the system. The force due to friction produces an internal torque, which does not
affect the angular momentum of the system. Therefore conservation of angular momentum gives
b. Before contact, only one flywheel is rotating. The rotational kinetic energy of this flywheel is the initial rotational
kinetic energy of the system, . The final kinetic energy is
Therefore, the ratio of the final kinetic energy to the initial kinetic energy is
Thus, 3/4 of the initial kinetic energy is lost to the coupling of the two flywheels.
Significance
Since the rotational inertia of the system increased, the angular velocity decreased, as expected from the law of
conservation of angular momentum. In this example, we see that the final kinetic energy of the system has
decreased, as energy is lost to the coupling of the flywheels. Compare this to the example of the skater in Figure
11.14 doing work to bring her arms inward and adding rotational kinetic energy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.4
A merry-go-round at a playground is rotating at 4.0 rev/min. Three children jump on and increase the moment of
inertia of the merry-go-round/children rotating system by . What is the new rotation rate?
EXAMPLE 11.8
Dismount from a High Bar
An 80.0-kg gymnast dismounts from a high bar. He starts the dismount at full extension, then tucks to complete a
number of revolutions before landing. His moment of inertia when fully extended can be approximated as a rod of
length 1.8 m and when in the tuck a rod of half that length. If his rotation rate at full extension is 1.0 rev/s and he
enters the tuck when his center of mass is at 3.0 m height moving horizontally to the floor, how many revolutions
can he execute if he comes out of the tuck at 1.8 m height? See Figure 11.17.

536 11 • Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.17 A gymnast dismounts from a high bar and executes a number of revolutions in the tucked position before landing upright.
Strategy
Using conservation of angular momentum, we can find his rotation rate when in the tuck. Using the equations of
kinematics, we can find the time interval from a height of 3.0 m to 1.8 m. Since he is moving horizontally with
respect to the ground, the equations of free fall simplify. This will allow the number of revolutions that can be
executed to be calculated. Since we are using a ratio, we can keep the units as rev/s and don’t need to convert to
radians/s.
Solution
The moment of inertia at full extension is .
The moment of inertia in the tuck is .
Conservation of angular momentum: .
Time interval in the tuck: .
In 0.5 s, he will be able to execute two revolutions at 4.0 rev/s.
Significance
Note that the number of revolutions he can complete will depend on how long he is in the air. In the problem, he is
exiting the high bar horizontally to the ground. He could also exit at an angle with respect to the ground, giving him
more or less time in the air depending on the angle, positive or negative, with respect to the ground. Gymnasts must
take this into account when they are executing their dismounts.
EXAMPLE 11.9
Conservation of Angular Momentum of a Collision
A bullet of mass is moving horizontally with a speed of The bullet strikes and becomes
embedded in the edge of a solid disk of mass and radius The cylinder is free to rotate
around its axis and is initially at rest (Figure 11.18). What is the angular velocity of the disk immediately after the
bullet is embedded?
Access for free at openstax.org

11.4 • Precession of a Gyroscope 537
FIGURE 11.18 A bullet is fired horizontally and becomes embedded in the edge of a disk that is free to rotate about its vertical axis.
Strategy
For the system of the bullet and the cylinder, no external torque acts along the vertical axis through the center of the
disk. Thus, the angular momentum along this axis is conserved. The initial angular momentum of the bullet is ,
which is taken about the rotational axis of the disk the moment before the collision. The initial angular momentum of
the cylinder is zero. Thus, the net angular momentum of the system is . Since angular momentum is conserved,
the initial angular momentum of the system is equal to the angular momentum of the bullet embedded in the disk
immediately after impact.
Solution
The initial angular momentum of the system is
The moment of inertia of the system with the bullet embedded in the disk is
The final angular momentum of the system is
Thus, by conservation of angular momentum, and
Solving for
Significance
The system is composed of both a point particle and a rigid body. Care must be taken when formulating the angular
momentum before and after the collision. Just before impact the angular momentum of the bullet is taken about the
rotational axis of the disk.
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physical processes underlying the phenomenon of precession
• Calculate the precessional angular velocity of a gyroscope
Figure 11.19 shows a gyroscope, defined as a spinning disk in which the axis of rotation is free to assume any
orientation. When spinning, the orientation of the spin axis is unaffected by the orientation of the body that encloses

538 11 • Angular Momentum
it. The body or vehicle enclosing the gyroscope can be moved from place to place and the orientation of the spin axis
will remain the same. This makes gyroscopes very useful in navigation, especially where magnetic compasses can’t
be used, such as in piloted and unpiloted spacecrafts, intercontinental ballistic missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles,
and satellites like the Hubble Space Telescope.
FIGURE 11.19 A gyroscope consists of a spinning disk about an axis that is free to assume any orientation.
We illustrate the precession of a gyroscope with an example of a top in the next two figures. If the top is placed on a
flat surface near the surface of Earth at an angle to the vertical and is not spinning, it will fall over, due to the force of
gravity producing a torque acting on its center of mass. This is shown in Figure 11.20(a). However, if the top is
spinning on its axis, rather than topple over due to this torque, it precesses about the vertical, shown in part (b) of
the figure. This is due to the torque on the center of mass, which provides the change in angular momentum.
FIGURE 11.20 (a) If the top is not spinning, there is a torque about the origin, and the top falls over. (b) If the top is spinning about
its axis it doesn’t fall over but precesses about the z-axis.
Figure 11.21 shows the forces acting on a spinning top. The torque produced is perpendicular to the angular
momentum vector. This changes the direction of the angular momentum vector according to but not its
magnitude. The top precesses around a vertical axis, since the torque is always horizontal and perpendicular to . If
the top is not spinning, it acquires angular momentum in the direction of the torque, and it rotates around a
horizontal axis, falling over just as we would expect.
Access for free at openstax.org

11.4 • Precession of a Gyroscope 539
FIGURE 11.21 The force of gravity acting on the center of mass produces a torque in the direction perpendicular to The magnitude of
doesn’t change but its direction does, and the top precesses about the z-axis.
We can experience this phenomenon first hand by holding a spinning bicycle wheel and trying to rotate it about an
axis perpendicular to the spin axis. As shown in Figure 11.22, the person applies forces perpendicular to the spin
axis in an attempt to rotate the wheel, but instead, the wheel axis starts to change direction to her left due to the
applied torque.
FIGURE 11.22 (a) A person holding the spinning bike wheel lifts it with her right hand and pushes down with her left hand in an attempt to
rotate the wheel. This action creates a torque directly toward her. This torque causes a change in angular momentum in exactly the
same direction. (b) A vector diagram depicting how add, producing a new angular momentum pointing more toward the person.