# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 536-544
############################################################

524 11 • Angular Momentum
plane containing and
11.5
FIGURE 11.9 In three-dimensional space, the position vector locates a particle in the xy-plane with linear momentum . The angular
momentum with respect to the origin is , which is in the z-direction. The direction of is given by the right-hand rule, as shown.
The intent of choosing the direction of the angular momentum to be perpendicular to the plane containing and is
similar to choosing the direction of torque to be perpendicular to the plane of as discussed in Fixed-Axis
Rotation. The magnitude of the angular momentum is found from the definition of the cross-product,
where is the angle between and The units of angular momentum are .
As with the definition of torque, we can define a lever arm that is the perpendicular distance from the momentum
vector to the origin, With this definition, the magnitude of the angular momentum becomes
We see that if the direction of is such that it passes through the origin, then and the angular momentum is
zero because the lever arm is zero. In this respect, the magnitude of the angular momentum depends on the choice
of origin.
If we take the time derivative of the angular momentum, we arrive at an expression for the torque on the particle:
Here we have used the definition of and the fact that a vector crossed into itself is zero. From Newton’s second
law, the net force acting on the particle, and the definition of the net torque, we can write
11.6
Note the similarity with the linear result of Newton’s second law, . The following problem-solving
strategy can serve as a guideline for calculating the angular momentum of a particle.
Access for free at openstax.org

11.2 • Angular Momentum 525
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Angular Momentum of a Particle
1. Choose a coordinate system about which the angular momentum is to be calculated.
2. Write down the radius vector to the point particle in unit vector notation.
3. Write the linear momentum vector of the particle in unit vector notation.
4. Take the cross product and use the right-hand rule to establish the direction of the angular
momentum vector.
5. See if there is a time dependence in the expression of the angular momentum vector. If there is, then a torque
exists about the origin, and use to calculate the torque. If there is no time dependence in the
expression for the angular momentum, then the net torque is zero.
EXAMPLE 11.4
Angular Momentum and Torque on a Meteor
A meteor enters Earth’s atmosphere (Figure 11.10) and is observed by someone on the ground before it burns up in
the atmosphere. The vector gives the position of the meteor with respect to the observer. At
the instant the observer sees the meteor, it has linear momentum , and it is accelerating at
a constant along its path, which for our purposes can be taken as a straight line. (a) What is the
angular momentum of the meteor about the origin, which is at the location of the observer? (b) What is the torque on
the meteor about the origin?
FIGURE 11.10 An observer on the ground sees a meteor at position with linear momentum .
Strategy
We resolve the acceleration into x- and y-components and use the kinematic equations to express the velocity as a
function of acceleration and time. We insert these expressions into the linear momentum and then calculate the
angular momentum using the cross-product. Since the position and momentum vectors are in the xy-plane, we
expect the angular momentum vector to be along the z-axis. To find the torque, we take the time derivative of the
angular momentum.
Solution
The meteor is entering Earth’s atmosphere at an angle of below the horizontal, so the components of the
acceleration in the x- and y-directions are

526 11 • Angular Momentum
We write the velocities using the kinematic equations.
a. The angular momentum is
At , the angular momentum of the meteor about the origin is
This is the instant that the observer sees the meteor.
b. To find the torque, we take the time derivative of the angular momentum. Taking the time derivative of as a
function of time, which is the second equation immediately above, we have
Then, since , we have
The units of torque are given as newton-meters, not to be confused with joules. As a check, we note that the
lever arm is the x-component of the vector in Figure 11.10 since it is perpendicular to the force acting on the
meteor, which is along its path. By Newton’s second law, this force is
The lever arm is
Thus, the torque is
Significance
Since the meteor is accelerating downward toward Earth, its radius and velocity vector are changing. Therefore,
since , the angular momentum is changing as a function of time. The torque on the meteor about the
origin, however, is constant, because the lever arm and the force on the meteor are constants. This example is
important in that it illustrates that the angular momentum depends on the choice of origin about which it is
calculated. The methods used in this example are also important in developing angular momentum for a system of
particles and for a rigid body.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.2
A proton spiraling around a magnetic field executes circular motion in the plane of the paper, as shown below. The
circular path has a radius of 0.4 m and the proton has velocity . What is the angular momentum of
the proton about the origin?
Access for free at openstax.org

11.2 • Angular Momentum 527
Angular Momentum of a System of Particles
The angular momentum of a system of particles is important in many scientific disciplines, one being astronomy.
Consider a spiral galaxy, a rotating island of stars like our own Milky Way. The individual stars can be treated as point
particles, each of which has its own angular momentum. The vector sum of the individual angular momenta give the
total angular momentum of the galaxy. In this section, we develop the tools with which we can calculate the total
angular momentum of a system of particles.
In the preceding section, we introduced the angular momentum of a single particle about a designated origin. The
expression for this angular momentum is where the vector is from the origin to the particle, and is
the particle’s linear momentum. If we have a system of N particles, each with position vector from the origin given
by and each having momentum then the total angular momentum of the system of particles about the origin is
the vector sum of the individual angular momenta about the origin. That is,
11.7
Similarly, if particle i is subject to a net torque about the origin, then we can find the net torque about the origin
due to the system of particles by differentiating Equation 11.7:
The sum of the individual torques produces a net external torque on the system, which we designate Thus,
11.8
Equation 11.8 states that the rate of change of the total angular momentum of a system is equal to the net external
torque acting on the system when both quantities are measured with respect to a given origin. Equation 11.8 can be
applied to any system that has net angular momentum, including rigid bodies, as discussed in the next section.
EXAMPLE 11.5
Angular Momentum of Three Particles
Referring to Figure 11.11(a), determine the total angular momentum due to the three particles about the origin. (b)
What is the rate of change of the angular momentum?

528 11 • Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.11 Three particles in the xy-plane with different position and momentum vectors.
Strategy
Write down the position and momentum vectors for the three particles. Calculate the individual angular momenta
and add them as vectors to find the total angular momentum. Then do the same for the torques.
Solution
a. Particle 1:
Particle 2: ,
Particle 3: ,
We add the individual angular momenta to find the total about the origin:
b. The individual forces and lever arms are
Therefore:
Significance
This example illustrates the superposition principle for angular momentum and torque of a system of particles. Care
must be taken when evaluating the radius vectors of the particles to calculate the angular momenta, and the lever
arms, to calculate the torques, as they are completely different quantities.
Access for free at openstax.org

11.2 • Angular Momentum 529
Angular Momentum of a Rigid Body
We have investigated the angular momentum of a single particle, which we generalized to a system of particles. Now
we can use the principles discussed in the previous section to develop the concept of the angular momentum of a
rigid body. Celestial objects such as planets have angular momentum due to their spin and orbits around stars. In
engineering, anything that rotates about an axis carries angular momentum, such as flywheels, propellers, and
rotating parts in engines. Knowledge of the angular momenta of these objects is crucial to the design of the system
in which they are a part.
To develop the angular momentum of a rigid body, we model a rigid body as being made up of small mass segments,
In Figure 11.12, a rigid body is constrained to rotate about the z-axis with angular velocity . All mass
segments that make up the rigid body undergo circular motion about the z-axis with the same angular velocity. Part
(a) of the figure shows mass segment with position vector from the origin and radius to the z-axis. The
magnitude of its tangential velocity is . Because the vectors are perpendicular to each other, the
magnitude of the angular momentum of this mass segment is
FIGURE 11.12 (a) A rigid body is constrained to rotate around the z-axis. The rigid body is symmetrical about the z-axis. A mass segment
is located at position which makes angle with respect to the z-axis. The circular motion of an infinitesimal mass segment is
shown. (b) is the angular momentum of the mass segment and has a component along the z-axis .
Using the right-hand rule, the angular momentum vector points in the direction shown in part (b). The sum of the
angular momenta of all the mass segments contains components both along and perpendicular to the axis of
rotation. Every mass segment has a perpendicular component of the angular momentum that will be cancelled by
the perpendicular component of an identical mass segment on the opposite side of the rigid body, because it is
cylindrically symmetric. Thus, the component along the axis of rotation is the only component that gives a nonzero
value when summed over all the mass segments. From part (b), the component of along the axis of rotation is
The net angular momentum of the rigid body along the axis of rotation is

530 11 • Angular Momentum
The summation is simply the moment of inertia I of the rigid body about the axis of rotation. For a thin
hoop rotating about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the hoop, all of the ’s are equal to R so the summation
reduces to which is the moment of inertia for a thin hoop found in Figure 10.20. Thus, the
magnitude of the angular momentum along the axis of rotation of a rigid body rotating with angular velocity about
the axis is
11.9
This equation is analogous to the magnitude of the linear momentum . The direction of the angular
momentum vector is directed along the axis of rotation given by the right-hand rule.
EXAMPLE 11.6
Angular Momentum of a Robot Arm
A robot arm on a Mars rover like Curiosity shown in Figure 11.8 is 1.0 m long and has forceps at the free end to pick
up rocks. The mass of the arm is 2.0 kg and the mass of the forceps is 1.0 kg. See Figure 11.13. The robot arm and
forceps move from rest to in 0.1 s. It rotates down and picks up a Mars rock that has mass 1.5 kg.
The axis of rotation is the point where the robot arm connects to the rover. (a) What is the angular momentum of the
robot arm by itself about the axis of rotation after 0.1 s when the arm has stopped accelerating? (b) What is the
angular momentum of the robot arm when it has the Mars rock in its forceps and is rotating upwards? (c) When the
arm does not have a rock in the forceps, what is the torque about the point where the arm connects to the rover
when it is accelerating from rest to its final angular velocity?
FIGURE 11.13 A robot arm on a Mars rover swings down and picks up a Mars rock. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech)
Strategy
We use Equation 11.9 to find angular momentum in the various configurations. When the arm is rotating downward,
the right-hand rule gives the angular momentum vector directed out of the page, which we will call the positive
z-direction. When the arm is rotating upward, the right-hand rule gives the direction of the angular momentum
vector into the page or in the negative z-direction. The moment of inertia is the sum of the individual moments of
inertia. The arm can be approximated with a solid rod, and the forceps and Mars rock can be approximated as point
masses located at a distance of 1 m from the origin. For part (c), we use Newton’s second law of motion for rotation
to find the torque on the robot arm.
Access for free at openstax.org

11.3 • Conservation of Angular Momentum 531
Solution
a. Writing down the individual moments of inertia, we have
Robot arm:
Forceps:
Mars rock:
Therefore, without the Mars rock, the total moment of inertia is
and the magnitude of the angular momentum is
The angular momentum vector is directed out of the page in the direction since the robot arm is rotating
counterclockwise.
b. We must include the Mars rock in the calculation of the moment of inertia, so we have
and
Now the angular momentum vector is directed into the page in the direction, by the right-hand rule, since
the robot arm is now rotating clockwise.
c. We find the torque when the arm does not have the rock by taking the derivative of the angular momentum
using Equation 11.8 But since , and understanding that the direction of the angular
momentum and torque vectors are along the axis of rotation, we can suppress the vector notation and find
which is Newton’s second law for rotation. Since , we can calculate the net torque:
Significance
The angular momentum in (a) is less than that of (b) due to the fact that the moment of inertia in (b) is greater than
(a), while the angular velocity is the same.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.3
Which has greater angular momentum: a solid sphere of mass m rotating at a constant angular frequency about
the z-axis, or a solid cylinder of same mass and rotation rate about the z-axis?
INTERACTIVE
Visit the University of Colorado’s Interactive Simulation of Angular Momentum (https://openstax.org/l/
21angmomintsim) to learn more about angular momentum.
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply conservation of angular momentum to determine the angular velocity of a rotating system in which
the moment of inertia is changing
• Explain how the rotational kinetic energy changes when a system undergoes changes in both moment of
inertia and angular velocity