# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 134-140
############################################################

122 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.22 Sample sketch to visualize acceleration opposite to the motion and stopping distance of a car.
Solution
a. First, we need to identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that v0 = 30.0 m/s, v = 0, and a
= −7.00 m/s2 (a is negative because it is in a direction opposite to velocity). We take x0 to be zero. We are
looking for displacement , or x − x0.
Second, we identify the equation that will help us solve the problem. The best equation to use is
This equation is best because it includes only one unknown, x. We know the values of all the other variables in
this equation. (Other equations would allow us to solve for x, but they require us to know the stopping time, t,
which we do not know. We could use them, but it would entail additional calculations.)
Third, we rearrange the equation to solve for x:
and substitute the known values:
Thus,
b. This part can be solved in exactly the same manner as (a). The only difference is that the acceleration is −5.00
m/s2. The result is
c. When the driver reacts, the stopping distance is the same as it is in (a) and (b) for dry and wet concrete. So, to
answer this question, we need to calculate how far the car travels during the reaction time, and then add that
to the stopping time. It is reasonable to assume the velocity remains constant during the driver’s reaction
time.
To do this, we, again, identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that ,
, and . We take to be zero. We are looking for .
Second, as before, we identify the best equation to use. In this case, works well because the only
unknown value is x, which is what we want to solve for.
Third, we substitute the knowns to solve the equation:
This means the car travels 15.0 m while the driver reacts, making the total displacements in the two cases of
dry and wet concrete 15.0 m greater than if he reacted instantly.
Last, we then add the displacement during the reaction time to the displacement when braking (Figure 3.23),
and find (a) to be 64.3 m + 15.0 m = 79.3 m when dry and (b) to be 90.0 m + 15.0 m = 105 m when wet.
Access for free at openstax.org

3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 123
FIGURE 3.23 The distance necessary to stop a car varies greatly, depending on road conditions and driver reaction time. Shown here are
the braking distances for dry and wet pavement, as calculated in this example, for a car traveling initially at 30.0 m/s. Also shown are the
total distances traveled from the point when the driver first sees a light turn red, assuming a 0.500-s reaction time.
Significance
The displacements found in this example seem reasonable for stopping a fast-moving car. It should take longer to
stop a car on wet pavement than dry. It is interesting that reaction time adds significantly to the displacements, but
more important is the general approach to solving problems. We identify the knowns and the quantities to be
determined, then find an appropriate equation. If there is more than one unknown, we need as many independent
equations as there are unknowns to solve. There is often more than one way to solve a problem. The various parts of
this example can, in fact, be solved by other methods, but the solutions presented here are the shortest.
EXAMPLE 3.11
Calculating Time
Suppose a car merges into freeway traffic on a 200-m-long ramp. If its initial velocity is 10.0 m/s and it accelerates
at 2.00 m/s2, how long does it take the car to travel the 200 m up the ramp? (Such information might be useful to a
traffic engineer.)
Strategy
First, we draw a sketch Figure 3.24. We are asked to solve for time t. As before, we identify the known quantities to
choose a convenient physical relationship (that is, an equation with one unknown, t.)
FIGURE 3.24 Sketch of a car accelerating on a freeway ramp.
Solution
Again, we identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that
, and x = 200 m.
We need to solve for t. The equation works best because the only unknown in the equation is
the variable t, for which we need to solve. From this insight we see that when we input the knowns into the equation,
we end up with a quadratic equation.

124 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
We need to rearrange the equation to solve for t, then substituting the knowns into the equation:
We then simplify the equation. The units of meters cancel because they are in each term. We can get the units of
seconds to cancel by taking t = t s, where t is the magnitude of time and s is the unit. Doing so leaves
We then use the quadratic formula to solve for t,
which yields two solutions: t = 10.0 and t = −20.0. A negative value for time is unreasonable, since it would mean
the event happened 20 s before the motion began. We can discard that solution. Thus,
Significance
Whenever an equation contains an unknown squared, there are two solutions. In some problems both solutions are
meaningful; in others, only one solution is reasonable. The 10.0-s answer seems reasonable for a typical freeway
on-ramp.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.5
A rocket accelerates at a rate of 20 m/s2 during launch. How long does it take the rocket to reach a velocity of 400
m/s?
EXAMPLE 3.12
Acceleration of a Spaceship
A spaceship has left Earth’s orbit and is on its way to the Moon. It accelerates at 20 m/s2 for 2 min and covers a
distance of 1000 km. What are the initial and final velocities of the spaceship?
Strategy
We are asked to find the initial and final velocities of the spaceship. Looking at the kinematic equations, we see that
one equation will not give the answer. We must use one kinematic equation to solve for one of the velocities and
substitute it into another kinematic equation to get the second velocity. Thus, we solve two of the kinematic
equations simultaneously.
Solution
First we solve for using
Then we substitute into to solve for the final velocity:
Access for free at openstax.org

3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 125
Significance
There are six variables in displacement, time, velocity, and acceleration that describe motion in one dimension. The
initial conditions of a given problem can be many combinations of these variables. Because of this diversity,
solutions may not be as easy as simple substitutions into one of the equations. This example illustrates that
solutions to kinematics may require solving two simultaneous kinematic equations.
With the basics of kinematics established, we can go on to many other interesting examples and applications. In the
process of developing kinematics, we have also glimpsed a general approach to problem solving that produces both
correct answers and insights into physical relationships. The next level of complexity in our kinematics problems
involves the motion of two interrelated bodies, called two-body pursuit problems.
Two-Body Pursuit Problems
Up until this point we have looked at examples of motion involving a single body. Even for the problem with two cars
and the stopping distances on wet and dry roads, we divided this problem into two separate problems to find the
answers. In a two-body pursuit problem, the motions of the objects are coupled—meaning, the unknown we seek
depends on the motion of both objects. To solve these problems we write the equations of motion for each object
and then solve them simultaneously to find the unknown. This is illustrated in Figure 3.25.
FIGURE 3.25 A two-body pursuit scenario where car 2 has a constant velocity and car 1 is behind with a constant acceleration. Car 1
catches up with car 2 at a later time.
The time and distance required for car 1 to catch car 2 depends on the initial distance car 1 is from car 2 as well as
the velocities of both cars and the acceleration of car 1. The kinematic equations describing the motion of both cars
must be solved to find these unknowns.
Consider the following example.
EXAMPLE 3.13
Cheetah Catching a Gazelle
A cheetah waits in hiding behind a bush. The cheetah spots a gazelle running past at 10 m/s. At the instant the
gazelle passes the cheetah, the cheetah accelerates from rest at 4 m/s2 to catch the gazelle. (a) How long does it
take the cheetah to catch the gazelle? (b) What is the displacement of the gazelle and cheetah?
Strategy
We use the set of equations for constant acceleration to solve this problem. Since there are two objects in motion,
we have separate equations of motion describing each animal. But what links the equations is a common parameter
that has the same value for each animal. If we look at the problem closely, it is clear the common parameter to each
animal is their position x at a later time t. Since they both start at , their displacements are the same at a later
time t, when the cheetah catches up with the gazelle. If we pick the equation of motion that solves for the
displacement for each animal, we can then set the equations equal to each other and solve for the unknown, which
is time.
Solution
a. Equation for the gazelle: The gazelle has a constant velocity, which is its average velocity, since it is not
accelerating. Therefore, we use Equation 3.10 with :

126 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Equation for the cheetah: The cheetah is accelerating from rest, so we use Equation 3.13 with and
:
Now we have an equation of motion for each animal with a common parameter, which can be eliminated to
find the solution. In this case, we solve for t:
The gazelle has a constant velocity of 10 m/s, which is its average velocity. The acceleration of the cheetah is
4 m/s2. Evaluating t, the time for the cheetah to reach the gazelle, we have
b. To get the displacement, we use either the equation of motion for the cheetah or the gazelle, since they should
both give the same answer.
Displacement of the cheetah:
Displacement of the gazelle:
We see that both displacements are equal, as expected.
Significance
It is important to analyze the motion of each object and to use the appropriate kinematic equations to describe the
individual motion. It is also important to have a good visual perspective of the two-body pursuit problem to see the
common parameter that links the motion of both objects.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.6
A bicycle has a constant velocity of 10 m/s. A person starts from rest and begins to run to catch up to the bicycle in
30 s when the bicycle is at the same position as the person. What is the acceleration of the person?
3.5 Free Fall
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use the kinematic equations with the variables y and g to analyze free-fall motion.
• Describe how the values of the position, velocity, and acceleration change during a free fall.
• Solve for the position, velocity, and acceleration as functions of time when an object is in a free fall.
An interesting application of Equation 3.4 through Equation 3.14 is called free fall, which describes the motion of an
object falling in a gravitational field, such as near the surface of Earth or other celestial objects of planetary size.
Let’s assume the body is falling in a straight line perpendicular to the surface, so its motion is one-dimensional. For
example, we can estimate the depth of a vertical mine shaft by dropping a rock into it and listening for the rock to hit
the bottom. But “falling,” in the context of free fall, does not necessarily imply the body is moving from a greater
height to a lesser height. If a ball is thrown upward, the equations of free fall apply equally to its ascent as well as its
descent.
Access for free at openstax.org

3.5 • Free Fall 127
Gravity
The most remarkable and unexpected fact about falling objects is that if air resistance and friction are negligible,
then in a given location all objects fall toward the center of Earth with the same constant acceleration, independent
of their mass. This experimentally determined fact is unexpected because we are so accustomed to the effects of air
resistance and friction that we expect light objects to fall slower than heavy ones. Until Galileo Galilei (1564–1642)
proved otherwise, people believed that a heavier object has a greater acceleration in a free fall. We now know this is
not the case. In the absence of air resistance, heavy objects arrive at the ground at the same time as lighter objects
when dropped from the same height Figure 3.26.
FIGURE 3.26 A hammer and a feather fall with the same constant acceleration if air resistance is negligible. This is a general characteristic
of gravity not unique to Earth, as astronaut David R. Scott demonstrated in 1971 on the Moon, where the acceleration from gravity is only
1.67 m/s2 and there is no atmosphere.
In the real world, air resistance can cause a lighter object to fall slower than a heavier object of the same size. A
tennis ball reaches the ground after a baseball dropped at the same time. (It might be difficult to observe the
difference if the height is not large.) Air resistance opposes the motion of an object through the air, and friction
between objects—such as between clothes and a laundry chute or between a stone and a pool into which it is
dropped—also opposes motion between them.
For the ideal situations of these first few chapters, an object falling without air resistance or friction is defined to be
in free fall. The force of gravity causes objects to fall toward the center of Earth. The acceleration of free-falling
objects is therefore called acceleration due to gravity. Acceleration due to gravity is constant, which means we can
apply the kinematic equations to any falling object where air resistance and friction are negligible. This opens to us a
broad class of interesting situations.
Acceleration due to gravity is so important that its magnitude is given its own symbol, g. It is constant at any given
location on Earth and has the average value
Although g varies from 9.78 m/s2 to 9.83 m/s2, depending on latitude, altitude, underlying geological formations,
and local topography, let’s use an average value of 9.8 m/s2 rounded to two significant figures in this text unless
specified otherwise. Neglecting these effects on the value of g as a result of position on Earth’s surface, as well as
effects resulting from Earth’s rotation, we take the direction of acceleration due to gravity to be downward (toward
the center of Earth). In fact, its direction defines what we call vertical. Note that whether acceleration a in the
kinematic equations has the value +g or −g depends on how we define our coordinate system. If we define the
upward direction as positive, then and if we define the downward direction as positive, then
.