# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 423-433
############################################################

9.4 • Types of Collisions 411
Now we can calculate the initial speed of the car:
Significance
This is an example of the type of analysis done by investigators of major car accidents. A great deal of legal and
financial consequences depend on an accurate analysis and calculation of momentum and energy.
This collision converted some of the initial kinetic energy to other forms (presumably the deformation of the car and
truck and some heat and sound):
Change in kinetic energy =
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.8
Suppose there had been no friction (the collision happened on ice); that would make zero, and thus
, which is obviously wrong. What is the mistake in this conclusion?
Subatomic Collisions and Momentum
Conservation of momentum is crucial to our understanding of atomic and subatomic particles because much of
what we know about these particles comes from collision experiments.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, there was considerable interest in, and debate about, the structure of the
atom. It was known that atoms contain two types of electrically charged particles: negatively charged electrons and
positively charged protons. (The existence of an electrically neutral particle was suspected, but would not be
confirmed until 1932.) The question was, how were these particles arranged in the atom? Were they distributed
uniformly throughout the volume of the atom (as J.J. Thomson proposed), or arranged at the corners of regular
polygons (which was Gilbert Lewis’ model), or rings of negative charge that surround the positively charged
nucleus—rather like the planetary rings surrounding Saturn (as suggested by Hantaro Nagaoka), or something else?
The New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford (along with the German physicist Hans Geiger and the British physicist
Ernest Marsden) performed the crucial experiment in 1909. They bombarded a thin sheet of gold foil with a beam of
high-energy (that is, high-speed) alpha-particles (the nucleus of a helium atom). The alpha-particles collided with
the gold atoms, and their subsequent velocities were detected and analyzed, using conservation of momentum and
conservation of energy.
If the charges of the gold atoms were distributed uniformly (per Thomson), then the alpha-particles should collide
with them and nearly all would be deflected through many angles, all small; the Nagaoka model would produce a
similar result. If the atoms were arranged as regular polygons (Lewis), the alpha-particles would deflect at a
relatively small number of angles.
What actually happened is that nearly none of the alpha-particles were deflected. Those that were, were deflected
at large angles, some close to —those alpha-particles reversed direction completely (Figure 9.21). None of the
existing atomic models could explain this. Eventually, Rutherford developed a model of the atom that was much
closer to what we now have—again, using conservation of momentum and energy as his starting point.

412 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.21 The Thomson and Rutherford models of the atom. The Thomson model predicted that nearly all of the incident alpha-
particles would be scattered and at small angles. Rutherford and Geiger found that nearly none of the alpha particles were scattered, but
those few that were deflected did so through very large angles. The results of Rutherford’s experiments were inconsistent with the
Thomson model. Rutherford used conservation of momentum and energy to develop a new, and better model of the atom—the nuclear
model.
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express momentum as a two-dimensional vector
• Write equations for momentum conservation in component form
• Calculate momentum in two dimensions, as a vector quantity
It is far more common for collisions to occur in two dimensions; that is, the angle between the initial velocity vectors
is neither zero nor . Let’s see what complications arise from this.
The first idea we need is that momentum is a vector; like all vectors, it can be expressed as a sum of perpendicular
components (usually, though not always, an x-component and a y-component, and a z-component if necessary).
Thus, when we write down the statement of conservation of momentum for a problem, our momentum vectors can
be, and usually will be, expressed in component form.
The second idea we need comes from the fact that momentum is related to force:
Expressing both the force and the momentum in component form,
Access for free at openstax.org

9.5 • Collisions in Multiple Dimensions 413
Remember, these equations are simply Newton’s second law, in vector form and in component form. We know that
Newton’s second law is true in each direction, independently of the others. It follows therefore (via Newton’s third
law) that conservation of momentum is also true in each direction independently.
These two ideas motivate the solution to two-dimensional problems: We write down the expression for conservation
of momentum twice: once in the x-direction and once in the y-direction.
9.18
This procedure is shown graphically in Figure 9.22.
FIGURE 9.22 (a) For two-dimensional momentum problems, break the initial momentum vectors into their x- and y-components. (b) Add
the x- and y-components together separately. This gives you the x- and y-components of the final momentum, which are shown as red
dashed vectors. (c) Adding these components together gives the final momentum.
We solve each of these two component equations independently to obtain the x- and y-components of the desired
velocity vector:

414 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
(Here, m represents the total mass of the system.) Finally, combine these components using the Pythagorean
theorem,
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Conservation of Momentum in Two Dimensions
The method for solving a two-dimensional (or even three-dimensional) conservation of momentum problem is
generally the same as the method for solving a one-dimensional problem, except that you have to conserve
momentum in both (or all three) dimensions simultaneously:
1. Identify a closed system.
2. Write down the equation that represents conservation of momentum in the x-direction, and solve it for the
desired quantity. If you are calculating a vector quantity (velocity, usually), this will give you the x-component
of the vector.
3. Write down the equation that represents conservation of momentum in the y-direction, and solve. This will
give you the y-component of your vector quantity.
4. Assuming you are calculating a vector quantity, use the Pythagorean theorem to calculate its magnitude, using
the results of steps 3 and 4.
EXAMPLE 9.14
Traffic Collision
A small car of mass 1200 kg traveling east at 60 km/hr collides at an intersection with a truck of mass 3000 kg that
is traveling due north at 40 km/hr (Figure 9.23). The two vehicles are locked together. What is the velocity of the
combined wreckage?
Access for free at openstax.org

9.5 • Collisions in Multiple Dimensions 415
FIGURE 9.23 A large truck moving north is about to collide with a small car moving east. The final momentum vector has both x- and
y-components.
Strategy
First off, we need a closed system. The natural system to choose is the (car + truck), but this system is not closed;
friction from the road acts on both vehicles. We avoid this problem by restricting the question to finding the velocity
at the instant just after the collision, so that friction has not yet had any effect on the system. With that restriction,
momentum is conserved for this system.
Since there are two directions involved, we do conservation of momentum twice: once in the x-direction and once in
the y-direction.
Solution
Before the collision the total momentum is
After the collision, the wreckage has momentum
Since the system is closed, momentum must be conserved, so we have
We have to be careful; the two initial momenta are not parallel. We must add vectorially (Figure 9.24).

416 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.24 Graphical addition of momentum vectors. Notice that, although the car’s velocity is larger than the truck’s, its momentum is
smaller.
If we define the +x-direction to point east and the +y-direction to point north, as in the figure, then (conveniently),
Therefore, in the x-direction:
and in the y-direction:
Applying the Pythagorean theorem gives
As for its direction, using the angle shown in the figure,
This angle is east of north, or counterclockwise from the +x-direction.
Significance
As a practical matter, accident investigators usually work in the “opposite direction”; they measure the distance of
skid marks on the road (which gives the stopping distance) and use the work-energy theorem along with
conservation of momentum to determine the speeds and directions of the cars prior to the collision. We saw that
analysis in an earlier section.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.9
Suppose the initial velocities were not at right angles to each other. How would this change both the physical result
Access for free at openstax.org

9.5 • Collisions in Multiple Dimensions 417
and the mathematical analysis of the collision?
EXAMPLE 9.15
Exploding Scuba Tank
A common scuba tank is an aluminum cylinder that weighs 31.7 pounds empty (Figure 9.25). When full of
compressed air, the internal pressure is between 2500 and 3000 psi (pounds per square inch). Suppose such a tank,
which had been sitting motionless, suddenly explodes into three pieces. The first piece, weighing 10 pounds, shoots
off horizontally at 235 miles per hour; the second piece (7 pounds) shoots off at 172 miles per hour, also in the
horizontal plane, but at a angle to the first piece. What is the mass and initial velocity of the third piece? (Do all
work, and express your final answer, in SI units.)
FIGURE 9.25 A scuba tank explodes into three pieces.
Strategy
To use conservation of momentum, we need a closed system. If we define the system to be the scuba tank, this is
not a closed system, since gravity is an external force. However, the problem asks for just the initial velocity of the
third piece, so we can neglect the effect of gravity and consider the tank by itself as a closed system. Notice that, for
this system, the initial momentum vector is zero.
We choose a coordinate system where all the motion happens in the xy-plane. We then write down the equations for
conservation of momentum in each direction, thus obtaining the x- and y-components of the momentum of the third
piece, from which we obtain its magnitude (via the Pythagorean theorem) and its direction. Finally, dividing this
momentum by the mass of the third piece gives us the velocity.
Solution
First, let’s get all the conversions to SI units out of the way:
Now apply conservation of momentum in each direction.

418 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
x-direction:
y-direction:
From our chosen coordinate system, we write the x-components as
For the y-direction, we have
This gives the magnitude of :
The velocity of the third piece is therefore
Access for free at openstax.org

9.6 • Center of Mass 419
The direction of its velocity vector is the same as the direction of its momentum vector:
Because is below the -axis, the actual angle is from the +x-direction.
Significance
The enormous velocities here are typical; an exploding tank of any compressed gas can easily punch through the
wall of a house and cause significant injury, or death. Fortunately, such explosions are extremely rare, on a
percentage basis.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.10
Notice that the mass of the air in the tank was neglected in the analysis and solution. How would the solution
method changed if the air was included? How large a difference do you think it would make in the final answer?
9.6 Center of Mass
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the meaning and usefulness of the concept of center of mass
• Calculate the center of mass of a given system
• Apply the center of mass concept in two and three dimensions
• Calculate the velocity and acceleration of the center of mass
We have been avoiding an important issue up to now: When we say that an object moves (more correctly,
accelerates) in a way that obeys Newton’s second law, we have been ignoring the fact that all objects are actually
made of many constituent particles. A car has an engine, steering wheel, seats, passengers; a football is leather and
rubber surrounding air; a brick is made of atoms. There are many different types of particles, and they are generally
not distributed uniformly in the object. How do we include these facts into our calculations?
Then too, an extended object might change shape as it moves, such as a water balloon or a cat falling (Figure 9.26).
This implies that the constituent particles are applying internal forces on each other, in addition to the external force
that is acting on the object as a whole. We want to be able to handle this, as well.

420 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.26 As the cat falls, its body performs complicated motions so it can land on its feet, but one point in the system moves with the
simple uniform acceleration of gravity.
The problem before us, then, is to determine what part of an extended object is obeying Newton’s second law when
an external force is applied and to determine how the motion of the object as a whole is affected by both the internal
and external forces.
Be warned: To treat this new situation correctly, we must be rigorous and completely general. We won’t make any
assumptions about the nature of the object, or of its constituent particles, or either the internal or external forces.
Thus, the arguments will be complex.
Internal and External Forces
Suppose we have an extended object of mass M, made of N interacting particles. Let’s label their masses as ,
where . Note that
9.19
If we apply some net external force on the object, every particle experiences some “share” or some fraction of
that external force. Let:
Notice that these fractions of the total force are not necessarily equal; indeed, they virtually never are. (They can be,
but they usually aren’t.) In general, therefore,
Next, we assume that each of the particles making up our object can interact with (apply forces on) every other
particle of the object. We won’t try to guess what kind of forces they are; but since these forces are the result of
particles of the object acting on other particles of the same object, we refer to them as internal forces ; thus:
the net internal force that the jth particle experiences from all the other particles that make up the object.
Now, the net force, internal plus external, on the jth particle is the vector sum of these:
9.20
where again, this is for all N particles; .
Access for free at openstax.org