# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 18-21
############################################################

6 1 • Units and Measurement
1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the scope of physics.
• Calculate the order of magnitude of a quantity.
• Compare measurable length, mass, and timescales quantitatively.
• Describe the relationships among models, theories, and laws.
Physics is devoted to the understanding of all natural phenomena. In physics, we try to understand physical
phenomena at all scales—from the world of subatomic particles to the entire universe. Despite the breadth of the
subject, the various subfields of physics share a common core. The same basic training in physics will prepare you to
work in any area of physics and the related areas of science and engineering. In this section, we investigate the
scope of physics; the scales of length, mass, and time over which the laws of physics have been shown to be
applicable; and the process by which science in general, and physics in particular, operates.
The Scope of Physics
Take another look at the chapter-opening image. The Whirlpool Galaxy contains billions of individual stars as well as
huge clouds of gas and dust. Its companion galaxy is also visible to the right. This pair of galaxies lies a staggering
billion trillion miles from our own galaxy (which is called the Milky Way). The stars and planets that
make up the Whirlpool Galaxy might seem to be the furthest thing from most people’s everyday lives, but the
Whirlpool is a great starting point to think about the forces that hold the universe together. The forces that cause the
Whirlpool Galaxy to act as it does are thought to be the same forces we contend with here on Earth, whether we are
planning to send a rocket into space or simply planning to raise the walls for a new home. The gravity that causes
the stars of the Whirlpool Galaxy to rotate and revolve is thought to be the same as what causes water to flow over
hydroelectric dams here on Earth. When you look up at the stars, realize the forces out there are the same as the
ones here on Earth. Through a study of physics, you may gain a greater understanding of the interconnectedness of
everything we can see and know in this universe.
Humans have created and manufactured millions of different objects. Successive technological periods (often
referred to as the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age, and so on) are marked by knowledge of the physical
properties of certain materials and the ability to manipulate them. This knowledge all stems from physics, whether
it's the way a rock would flake when constructing a spear point, the effect of integrating carbon with iron in South
Indian and Sri Lankan furnaces to create the earliest high-quality steel, or the proper way to combine perfectly
ground and polished pieces of glass to create optical instruments. Our current technological age, the Information
Age, can be traced to critical innovations made by people from all backgrounds working together. Mohamed M.
Atalla and Dawon Kahng, for example, invented the MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor).
Although unknown to most people, this tiny device, created in 1959 by an Egyptian-born scientist and a Korean-
born scientist working in a lab in New Jersey (U.S.), is the basis for modern electronics. More MOSFETs have been
produced than any other object in human history. They are used in computers, smartphones, microwave ovens,
automotive controls, medical instruments, and nearly every other electronic device.
Next, think about the most exciting modern technologies that you have heard about in the news, such as trains that
levitate above tracks, “invisibility cloaks” that bend light around them, and microscopic robots that fight cancer cells
in our bodies. All these groundbreaking advances, commonplace or unbelievable, rely on the principles of physics.
Aside from playing a significant role in technology, professionals such as engineers, pilots, physicians, physical
therapists, electricians, and computer programmers apply physics concepts in their daily work. For example, a pilot
must understand how wind forces affect a flight path; a physical therapist must understand how the muscles in the
body experience forces as they move and bend. As you will learn in this text, the principles of physics are propelling
new, exciting technologies, and these principles are applied in a wide range of careers.
The underlying order of nature makes science in general, and physics in particular, interesting and enjoyable to
study. For example, what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in common? Both contain energy that can be
converted to other forms. The law of conservation of energy (which says that energy can change form but is never
lost) ties together such topics as food calories, batteries, heat, light, and watch springs. Understanding this law
Access for free at openstax.org

1.1 • The Scope and Scale of Physics 7
makes it easier to learn about the various forms energy takes and how they relate to one another. Apparently
unrelated topics are connected through broadly applicable physical laws, permitting an understanding beyond just
the memorization of lists of facts.
Science consists of theories and laws that are the general truths of nature, as well as the body of knowledge they
encompass. Scientists are continuously trying to expand this body of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the
laws that describe it. Physics, which comes from the Greek phúsis, meaning “nature,” is concerned with describing
the interactions of energy, matter, space, and time to uncover the fundamental mechanisms that underlie every
phenomenon. This concern for describing the basic phenomena in nature essentially defines the scope of physics.
Physics aims to understand the world around us at the most basic level. It emphasizes the use of a small number of
quantitative laws to do this, which can be useful to other fields pushing the performance boundaries of existing
technologies. Consider a smartphone (Figure 1.2). Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various
circuits inside the device. This knowledge helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when
building a smartphone. Knowledge of the physics underlying these devices is required to shrink their size or increase
their processing speed. Or, think about a GPS. Physics describes the relationship between the speed of an object,
the distance over which it travels, and the time it takes to travel that distance. GPS relies on precise calculations that
account for variations in the Earth's landscapes, the exact distance between orbiting satellites, and even the effect
of a complex occurrence of time dilation. Most of these calculations are founded on algorithms developed by Gladys
West, a mathematician and computer scientist who programmed the first computers capable of highly accurate
remote sensing and positioning. When you use a GPS device, it utilizes these algorithms to recognize where you are
and how your position relates to other objects on Earth.
FIGURE 1.2 The Apple iPhone is a common smartphone with a GPS function. Physics describes the way that electricity flows through the
circuits of this device. Engineers use their knowledge of physics to construct an iPhone with features that consumers will enjoy. One
specific feature of an iPhone is the GPS function. A GPS uses physics equations to determine the drive time between two locations on a
map. (credit: Jane Whitney)
Knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as well as in nonscientific professions. It can help you
understand how microwave ovens work, why metals should not be put into them, and why they might affect
pacemakers. Physics allows you to understand the hazards of radiation and to evaluate these hazards rationally and
more easily. Physics also explains the reason why a black car radiator helps remove heat in a car engine, and it
explains why a white roof helps keep the inside of a house cool. Similarly, the operation of a car’s ignition system as
well as the transmission of electrical signals throughout our body’s nervous system are much easier to understand
when you think about them in terms of basic physics.
Physics is a key element of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others. Chemistry, for

8 1 • Units and Measurement
example—since it deals with the interactions of atoms and molecules—has close ties to atomic and molecular
physics. Most branches of engineering are concerned with designing new technologies, processes, or structures
within the constraints set by the laws of physics. In architecture, physics is at the heart of structural stability and is
involved in the acoustics, heating, lighting, and cooling of buildings. Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such as
radioactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, and heat transfer within Earth. Some disciplines, such as
biophysics and geophysics, are hybrids of physics and other disciplines.
Physics has many applications in the biological sciences. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the properties
of cells and their environments. On the macroscopic level, it explains the heat, work, and power associated with the
human body and its various organ systems. Physics is involved in medical diagnostics, such as radiographs,
magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasonic blood flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes involves
physics directly; for example, cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation. Physics also explains sensory
phenomena, such as how musical instruments make sound, how the eye detects color, and how lasers transmit
information.
It is not necessary to study all applications of physics formally. What is most useful is knowing the basic laws of
physics and developing skills in the analytical methods for applying them. The study of physics also can improve
your problem-solving skills. Furthermore, physics retains the most basic aspects of science, so it is used by all the
sciences, and the study of physics makes other sciences easier to understand.
The Scale of Physics
From the discussion so far, it should be clear that to accomplish your goals in any of the various fields within the
natural sciences and engineering, a thorough grounding in the laws of physics is necessary. The reason for this is
simply that the laws of physics govern everything in the observable universe at all measurable scales of length,
mass, and time. Now, that is easy enough to say, but to come to grips with what it really means, we need to get a
little bit quantitative. So, before surveying the various scales that physics allows us to explore, let’s first look at the
concept of “order of magnitude,” which we use to come to terms with the vast ranges of length, mass, and time that
we consider in this text (Figure 1.3).
FIGURE 1.3 (a) Using a scanning tunneling microscope, scientists can see the individual atoms (diameters around 10–10 m) that compose
this sheet of gold. (b) Tiny phytoplankton swim among crystals of ice in the Antarctic Sea. They range from a few micrometers (1 μm is 10–6
m) to as much as 2 mm (1 mm is 10–3 m) in length. (c) These two colliding galaxies, known as NGC 4676A (right) and NGC 4676B (left), are
nicknamed “The Mice” because of the tail of gas emanating from each one. They are located 300 million light-years from Earth in the
constellation Coma Berenices. Eventually, these two galaxies will merge into one. (credit a: modification of work by
"Erwinrossen"/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook University; NOAA Corps
Collections; credit c: modification of work by NASA, H. Ford (JHU), G. Illingworth (UCSC/LO), M. Clampin (STScI), G. Hartig (STScI), the ACS
Science Team, and ESA)
Order of magnitude
The order of magnitude of a number is the power of 10 that most closely approximates it. Thus, the order of
magnitude refers to the scale (or size) of a value. Each power of 10 represents a different order of magnitude. For
example, and so forth, are all different orders of magnitude, as are and
To find the order of magnitude of a number, take the base-10 logarithm of the number and round it to the nearest
integer, then the order of magnitude of the number is simply the resulting power of 10. For example, the order of
magnitude of 800 is 103 because which rounds to 3. Similarly, the order of magnitude of 450 is
Access for free at openstax.org