# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 552-558
############################################################

540 11 • Angular Momentum
The wheel moves toward the person, perpendicular to the forces she exerts on it.
We all know how easy it is for a bicycle to tip over when sitting on it at rest. But when riding the bicycle at a good
pace, tipping it over involves changing the angular momentum vector of the spinning wheels.
INTERACTIVE
View the video on gyroscope precession (https://openstax.org/l/21gyrovideo) for a complete demonstration of
precession of the bicycle wheel.
Also, when a spinning disk is put in a box such as a Blu-Ray player, try to move it. It is easy to translate the box in a
given direction but difficult to rotate it about an axis perpendicular to the axis of the spinning disk, since we are
putting a torque on the box that will cause the angular momentum vector of the spinning disk to precess.
We can calculate the precession rate of the top in Figure 11.21. From Figure 11.21, we see that the magnitude of
the torque is
Thus,
The angle the top precesses through in time dt is
The precession angular velocity is and from this equation we see that
11.12
In this derivation, we assumed that that is, that the precession angular velocity is much less than the
angular velocity of the gyroscope disk. The precession angular velocity adds a small component to the angular
momentum along the z-axis. This is seen in a slight bob up and down as the gyroscope precesses, referred to as
nutation.
Earth itself acts like a gigantic gyroscope. Its angular momentum is along its axis and currently points at Polaris, the
North Star. But Earth is slowly precessing (once in about 26,000 years) due to the torque of the Sun and the Moon
on its nonspherical shape.
EXAMPLE 11.10
Period of Precession
A gyroscope spins with its tip on the ground and is spinning with negligible frictional resistance. The disk of the
gyroscope has mass 0.3 kg and is spinning at 20 rev/s. Its center of mass is 5.0 cm from the pivot and the radius of
the disk is 5.0 cm. What is the precessional period of the gyroscope?
Strategy
We use Equation 11.12 to find the precessional angular velocity of the gyroscope. This allows us to find the period of
precession.
Solution
The moment of inertia of the disk is
Access for free at openstax.org

11.4 • Precession of a Gyroscope 541
The angular velocity of the disk is
We can now substitute in Equation 11.12. The precessional angular velocity is
The precessional period of the gyroscope is
Significance
The precessional angular frequency of the gyroscope, 3.12 rad/s, or about 0.5 rev/s, is much less than the angular
velocity 20 rev/s of the gyroscope disk. Therefore, we don’t expect a large component of the angular momentum to
arise due to precession, and Equation 11.12 is a good approximation of the precessional angular velocity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.5
A top has a precession frequency of 5.0 rad/s on Earth. What is its precession frequency on the Moon?

542 11 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
angular momentum rotational analog of linear when no external torque is applied to the system
momentum, found by taking the product of moment precession circular motion of the pole of the axis of a
of inertia and angular velocity spinning object around another axis due to a torque
law of conservation of angular momentum angular rolling motion combination of rotational and
momentum is conserved, that is, the initial angular translational motion with or without slipping
momentum is equal to the final angular momentum
Key Equations
Velocity of center of mass of rolling object
Acceleration of center of mass of rolling object
Displacement of center of mass of rolling object
Acceleration of an object rolling without slipping
Angular momentum
Derivative of angular momentum equals torque
Angular momentum of a system of particles
For a system of particles, derivative of angular
momentum equals torque
Angular momentum of a rotating rigid body
Conservation of angular momentum
Conservation of angular momentum
Precessional angular velocity
Summary
11.1 Rolling Motion product of the position vector in the given
coordinate system and the particle’s linear
• In rolling motion without slipping, a static friction
momentum.
force is present between the rolling object and
• The angular momentum of a system of
the surface. The relations
all
particles about a designated origin is the vector
apply, such that the linear velocity, acceleration,
sum of the individual momenta of the particles
and distance of the center of mass are the
that make up the system.
angular variables multiplied by the radius of the
• The net torque on a system about a given origin is
object.
the time derivative of the angular momentum
• In rolling motion with slipping, a kinetic friction
force arises between the rolling object and the about that origin: .
surface. In this case, • A rigid rotating body has angular momentum
. directed along the axis of rotation. The
• Energy conservation can be used to analyze time derivative of the angular momentum
rolling motion. Energy is conserved in rolling gives the net torque on a rigid body
motion without slipping. Energy is not conserved and is directed along the axis of rotation.
in rolling motion with slipping due to the heat
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
generated by kinetic friction.
• In the absence of external torques, a system’s
11.2 Angular Momentum
total angular momentum is conserved. This is the
• The angular momentum of a single rotational counterpart to linear momentum being
particle about a designated origin is the vector conserved when the external force on a system is
Access for free at openstax.org

11 • Chapter Review 543
zero. 11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
• For a rigid body that changes its angular
• When a gyroscope is set on a pivot near the
momentum in the absence of a net external
surface of Earth, it precesses around a vertical
torque, conservation of angular momentum gives
axis, since the torque is always horizontal and
. This equation says that the
perpendicular to If the gyroscope is not
angular velocity is inversely proportional to the
spinning, it acquires angular momentum in the
moment of inertia. Thus, if the moment of inertia
direction of the torque, and it rotates about a
decreases, the angular velocity must increase to
horizontal axis, falling over just as we would
conserve angular momentum.
expect.
• Systems containing both point particles and rigid
• The precessional angular velocity is given by
bodies can be analyzed using conservation of
angular momentum. The angular momentum of , where r is the distance from the
all bodies in the system must be taken about a pivot to the center of mass of the gyroscope, I is
common axis. the moment of inertia of the gyroscope’s spinning
disk, M is its mass, and is the angular
frequency of the gyroscope disk.
Conceptual Questions
11.1 Rolling Motion origin it has linear momentum. What conditions
must exist for this particle’s angular momentum
1 . Can a round object released from rest at the top
to be zero about the chosen origin?
of a frictionless incline undergo rolling motion?
10 . If you know the velocity of a particle, can you
2 . A cylindrical can of radius R is rolling across a
say anything about the particle’s angular
horizontal surface without slipping. (a) After one
momentum?
complete revolution of the can, what is the
distance that its center of mass has moved? (b) 11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
Would this distance be greater or smaller if
11 . What is the purpose of the small propeller at the
slipping occurred?
back of a helicopter that rotates in the plane
3 . A wheel is released from the top on an incline. Is perpendicular to the large propeller?
the wheel most likely to slip if the incline is
12 . Suppose a child walks from the outer edge of a
steep or gently sloped?
rotating merry-go-round to the inside. Does the
4 . Which rolls down an inclined plane faster, a angular velocity of the merry-go-round increase,
hollow cylinder or a solid sphere? Both have the decrease, or remain the same? Explain your
same mass and radius. answer. Assume the merry-go-round is spinning
without friction.
5 . A hollow sphere and a hollow cylinder of the
same radius and mass roll up an incline without 13 . As the rope of a tethered ball winds around a
slipping and have the same initial center of mass pole, what happens to the angular velocity of the
velocity. Which object reaches a greater height ball?
before stopping?
14 . Suppose the polar ice sheets broke free and
11.2 Angular Momentum floated toward Earth’s equator without melting.
What would happen to Earth’s angular velocity?
6 . Can you assign an angular momentum to a
particle without first defining a reference point? 15 . Explain why stars spin faster when they
collapse.
7 . For a particle traveling in a straight line, are
there any points about which the angular 16 . Competitive divers pull their limbs in and curl up
momentum is zero? Assume the line intersects their bodies when they do flips. Just before entering
the origin. the water, they fully extend their limbs to enter
straight down (see below). Explain the effect of both
8 . Under what conditions does a rigid body have
actions on their angular velocities. Also explain the
angular momentum but not linear momentum?
effect on their angular momentum.
9 . If a particle is moving with respect to a chosen

544 11 • Chapter Review
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
17 . Gyroscopes used in guidance systems to
indicate directions in space must have an
angular momentum that does not change in
direction. When placed in the vehicle, they are
put in a compartment that is separated from the
main fuselage, such that changes in the
orientation of the fuselage does not affect the
orientation of the gyroscope. If the space vehicle
is subjected to large forces and accelerations
how can the direction of the gyroscopes angular
momentum be constant at all times?
18 . Earth precesses about its vertical axis with a
period of 26,000 years. Discuss whether
Equation 11.12 can be used to calculate the
precessional angular velocity of Earth.
Problems
11.1 Rolling Motion 10.0 m to the bottom in 2.60 s. Find the moment
of inertia of the body in terms of its mass m and
19 . What is the angular velocity of a 75.0-cm-
radius r.
diameter tire on an automobile traveling at 90.0
km/h? 26 . A yo-yo can be thought of a solid cylinder of
mass m and radius r that has a light string
20 . A boy rides his bicycle 2.00 km. The wheels have
wrapped around its circumference (see below).
radius 30.0 cm. What is the total angle the tires
One end of the string is held fixed in space. If the
rotate through during his trip?
cylinder falls as the string unwinds without
21 . If the boy on the bicycle in the preceding slipping, what is the acceleration of the cylinder?
problem accelerates from rest to a speed of 10.0
m/s in 10.0 s, what is the angular acceleration of
the tires?
22 . Formula One race cars have 66-cm-diameter
tires. If a Formula One averages a speed of 300
km/h during a race, what is the angular
displacement in revolutions of the wheels if the
race car maintains this speed for 1.5 hours?
23 . A marble rolls down an incline at from rest.
27 . A solid cylinder of radius 10.0 cm rolls down an
(a) What is its acceleration? (b) How far does it
incline with slipping. The angle of the incline is
go in 3.0 s?
The coefficient of kinetic friction on the
24 . Repeat the preceding problem replacing the surface is 0.400. What is the angular
marble with a solid cylinder. Explain the new acceleration of the solid cylinder? What is the
result. linear acceleration?
25 . A rigid body with a cylindrical cross-section is 28 . A bowling ball rolls up a ramp 0.5 m high without
released from the top of a incline. It rolls slipping to storage. It has an initial velocity of its
Access for free at openstax.org

11 • Chapter Review 545
center of mass of 3.0 m/s. (a) What is its velocity angle with respect to the ground. The radius
at the top of the ramp? (b) If the ramp is 1 m vector to the bird and its momentum vector lie in
high does it make it to the top? the xy-plane. What is the bird’s angular
momentum about the point where you are
29 . A 40.0-kg solid cylinder is rolling across a
standing?
horizontal surface at a speed of 6.0 m/s. How
much work is required to stop it? 36 . A Formula One race car with mass 750.0 kg is
speeding through a course in Monaco and enters
30 . A 40.0-kg solid sphere is rolling across a
a circular turn at 220.0 km/h in the
horizontal surface with a speed of 6.0 m/s. How
counterclockwise direction about the origin of
much work is required to stop it? Compare
the circle. At another part of the course, the car
results with the preceding problem.
enters a second circular turn at 180 km/h also in
31 . A solid cylinder rolls up an incline at an angle of the counterclockwise direction. If the radius of
If it starts at the bottom with a speed of 10 curvature of the first turn is 130.0 m and that of
m/s, how far up the incline does it travel? the second is 100.0 m, compare the angular
momenta of the race car in each turn taken
32 . A solid cylindrical wheel of mass M and radius R
about the origin of the circular turn.
is pulled by a force applied to the center of the
wheel at to the horizontal (see the following 37 . A particle of mass 5.0 kg has position vector
figure). If the wheel is to roll without slipping, at a particular instant of
what is the maximum value of The time when its velocity is with
respect to the origin. (a) What is the angular
coefficients of static and kinetic friction are
momentum of the particle? (b) If a force
acts on the particle at this instant,
what is the torque about the origin?
38 . Use the right-hand rule to determine the
directions of the angular momenta about the
origin of the particles as shown below. The
z-axis is out of the page.
33 . A hollow cylinder that is rolling without slipping
is given an initial velocity and rolls up an incline
to a vertical height of 1.0 m. If a hollow sphere
of the same mass and radius is given the same
initial velocity, how high vertically does it roll up
the incline?
39 . Suppose the particles in the preceding problem
11.2 Angular Momentum have masses
34 . A 0.2-kg particle is travelling along the line . The velocities of the particles are
with a velocity . What is the
, ,
angular momentum of the particle about the
, . (a) Calculate
origin?
the angular momentum of each particle about
35 . A bird flies overhead from where you stand at an the origin. (b) What is the total angular
altitude of 300.0 m and at a speed horizontal to momentum of the four-particle system about the
the ground of 20.0 m/s. The bird has a mass of origin?
2.0 kg. The radius vector to the bird makes an
40 . Two particles of equal mass travel with the same