# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 154-160
############################################################

144 Chapter 3 | The First Law of Thermodynamics
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 145
4 | THE SECOND LAW OF
THERMODYNAMICS
Figure 4.1 A xenon ion engine from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory shows the faint blue glow of charged atoms emitted from
the engine. The ion propulsion engine is the first nonchemical propulsion to be used as the primary means of propelling a
spacecraft. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL)
Chapter Outline
4.1Reversible and Irreversible Processes
4.2Heat Engines
4.3Refrigerators and Heat Pumps
4.4Statements of the Second Law of Thermodynamics
4.5The Carnot Cycle
4.6Entropy
4.7Entropy on a Microscopic Scale
Introduction
According to the first law of thermodynamics, the only processes that can occur are those that conserve energy. But this
cannotbetheonlyrestrictionimposedbynature,becausemanyseeminglypossiblethermodynamicprocessesthatwould
conserveenergydonotoccur.Forexample,whentwobodiesareinthermalcontact,heatneverflowsfromthecolderbody
to the warmer one, even though this is not forbidden by the first law. So some other thermodynamic principles must be
controlling the behavior of physical systems.
One such principle is the second law of thermodynamics, which limits the use of energy within a source. Energy cannot
arbitrarily pass from one object to another, just as we cannot transfer heat from a cold object to a hot one without doing
anywork.Wecannotunmixcreamfromcoffeewithoutachemicalprocessthatchangesthephysicalcharacteristicsofthe
systemoritsenvironment.Wecannotuseinternalenergystoredintheairtopropelacar,orusetheenergyoftheoceanto
run a ship, without disturbing something around that object.
Inthechaptercoveringthefirstlawofthermodynamics,westartedourdiscussionwithajokebyC.P.Snowstatingthat

146 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
thefirstlawmeans“youcan’twin.”Heparaphrasedthesecondlawas“youcan’tbreakeven,exceptonaverycoldday.”
Unlessyouareatzerokelvin,youcannotconvert100%ofthermalenergyintowork.Westartbydiscussingspontaneous
processes and explain why some processes require work to occur even if energy would have been conserved.
4.1 | Reversible and Irreversible Processes
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define reversible and irreversible processes
• State the second law of thermodynamics via an irreversible process
Consider an ideal gas that is held in half of a thermally insulated container by a wall in the middle of the container. The
otherhalfofthecontainerisundervacuumwithnomoleculesinside.Now,ifweremovethewallinthemiddlequickly,the
gas expands and fills up the entire container immediately, as shown inFigure 4.2.
Figure 4.2 A gas expanding from half of a container to the entire container (a) before and (b) after the wall in the middle is
removed.
Becausehalfofthecontainerisundervacuumbeforethegasexpandsthere,wedonotexpectanyworktobedonebythe
system—thatis, W =0—becausenoforcefromthevacuumisexertedonthegasduringtheexpansion.Ifthecontainer
isthermallyinsulatedfromtherestoftheenvironment,wedonotexpectanyheattransfertothesystemeither,so Q=0.
Then the first law of thermodynamics leads to the change of the internal energy of the system,
ΔE =Q−W =0.
int
Foranidealgas,iftheinternalenergydoesn’tchange,thenthetemperaturestaysthesame.Thus,theequationofstateof
theidealgasgivesusthefinalpressureofthegas, p=nRT/V = p /2, where p isthepressureofthegasbeforethe
0 0
expansion.Thevolumeisdoubledandthepressureishalved,butnothingelseseemstohavechangedduringtheexpansion.
All of this discussion is based on what we have learned so far and makes sense. Here is what puzzles us: Can all the
moleculesgobackwardtotheoriginalhalfofthecontainerinsomefuturetime?Ourintuitiontellsusthatthisisgoingtobe
veryunlikely,eventhoughnothingwehavelearnedsofarpreventssuchaneventfromhappening,regardlessofhowsmall
the probability is. What we are really asking is whether the expansion into the vacuum half of the container isreversible.
Areversibleprocessisaprocessinwhichthesystemandenvironmentcanberestoredtoexactlythesameinitialstatesthat
theywereinbeforetheprocessoccurred,ifwegobackwardalongthepathoftheprocess.Thenecessaryconditionfora
reversibleprocessisthereforethequasi-staticrequirement.Notethatitisquiteeasytorestoreasystemtoitsoriginalstate;
thehardpartistohaveitsenvironmentrestoredtoitsoriginalstateatthesametime.Forexample,intheexampleofanideal
gasexpandingintovacuumtotwiceitsoriginalvolume,wecaneasilypushitbackwithapistonandrestoreitstemperature
andpressurebyremovingsomeheatfromthegas.Theproblemisthatwecannotdoitwithoutchangingsomethinginits
surroundings, such as dumping some heat there.
A reversible process is truly an ideal process that rarely happens. We can make certain processes close to reversible and
thereforeusetheconsequencesofthecorrespondingreversibleprocessesasastartingpointorreference.Inreality,almost
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 147
all processes are irreversible, and some properties of the environment are altered when the properties of the system are
restored.Theexpansionofanidealgas,aswehavejustoutlined,isirreversiblebecausetheprocessisnotevenquasi-static,
that is, not in an equilibrium state at any moment of the expansion.
Fromthemicroscopicpointofview,aparticledescribedbyNewton’ssecondlawcangobackwardifweflipthedirection
oftime.Butthisisnotthecase,inpracticalterms,inamacroscopicsystemwithmorethan 10 23 particlesormolecules,
wherenumerouscollisionsbetweenthesemoleculestendtoeraseanytraceofmemoryoftheinitialtrajectoryofeachof
theparticles.Forexample,wecanactuallyestimatethechanceforalltheparticlesintheexpandedgastogobacktothe
original half of the container, but the current age of the universe is still not long enough for it to happen even once.
An irreversible process is what we encounter in reality almost all the time. The system and its environment cannot be
restoredtotheiroriginalstatesatthesametime.Becausethisiswhathappensinnature,itisalsocalledanaturalprocess.
The signofanirreversible process comes fromthe finite gradient between the states occurring inthe actual process. For
example, when heat flows from one object to another, there is a finite temperature difference (gradient) between the two
objects.Moreimportantly,atanygivenmomentoftheprocess,thesystemmostlikelyisnotatequilibrium orinawell-
defined state. This phenomenon is calledirreversibility.
Let us see another example of irreversibility in thermal processes. Consider two objects in thermal contact: one at
temperature T and the other at temperature T >T , as shown inFigure 4.3.
1 2 1
Figure 4.3 Spontaneous heat flow from an object at higher
temperature T to another at lower temperature T .
2 1
Weknowfromcommonpersonalexperience thatheatflowsfromahotterobject toacolderone.Forexample, whenwe
holdafewpiecesoficeinourhands,wefeelcoldbecauseheathasleftourhandsintotheice.Theoppositeistruewhen
weholdoneendofametalrodwhilekeepingtheotherendoverafire.Basedonalloftheexperimentsthathavebeendone
on spontaneous heat transfer, the following statement summarizes the governing principle:
Second Law of Thermodynamics (Clausius statement)
Heat never flows spontaneously from a colder object to a hotter object.
Thisstatementturnsouttobeoneofseveraldifferentwaysofstatingthesecondlawofthermodynamics.Theformofthis
statementiscreditedtoGermanphysicistRudolfClausius(1822−1888)andisreferredtoastheClausiusstatementofthe
secondlawofthermodynamics.Theword“spontaneously”heremeansnootherefforthasbeenmadebyathirdparty,or
onethatisneitherthehotternorcolderobject.Wewillintroducesomeothermajorstatementsofthesecondlawandshow
that they imply each other. In fact, all the different statements of the second law of thermodynamics can be shown to be
equivalent,andallleadtotheirreversibilityofspontaneousheatflowbetweenmacroscopicobjectsofaverylargenumber
of molecules or particles.
BothisothermalandadiabaticprocessessketchedonapVgraph(discussedinTheFirstLawofThermodynamics)are
reversibleinprinciplebecausethesystemisalwaysatanequilibriumstateatanypointoftheprocessesandcangoforward
orbackwardalongthegivencurves.OtheridealizedprocessescanberepresentedbypVcurves;Table4.1summarizesthe
most common reversible processes.
Process Constant Quantity and Resulting Fact
Isobaric Constant pressure W = pΔV
Isochoric Constant volume W =0
Table 4.1Summary of Simple Thermodynamic Processes

148 Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Process Constant Quantity and Resulting Fact
Isothermal Constant temperature ΔT =0
Adiabatic No heat transfer Q=0
Table 4.1Summary of Simple Thermodynamic Processes
4.2 | Heat Engines
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the function and components of a heat engine
• Explain the efficiency of an engine
• Calculate the efficiency of an engine for a given cycle of an ideal gas
A heat engine is a device used to extract heat from a source and then convert it into mechanical work that is used for
all sorts of applications. For example, a steam engine on an old-style train can produce the work needed for driving the
train.Severalquestionsemergefromtheconstructionandapplicationofheatengines.Forexample,whatisthemaximum
percentage of the heat extracted that can be used to do work? This turns out to be a question that can only be answered
through the second law of thermodynamics.
The second law of thermodynamics can be formally stated in several ways. One statement presented so far is about the
directionofspontaneousheatflow,knownastheClausiusstatement.Acoupleofotherstatementsarebasedonheatengines.
Wheneverweconsiderheatenginesandassociateddevicessuchasrefrigeratorsandheatpumps,wedonotusethenormal
sign convention for heat and work. For convenience, we assume that the symbols Q
h
, Q c, and W represent only the
amounts of heat transferred and work delivered, regardless what the givers or receivers are. Whether heat is entering or
leaving a system and work is done to or by a system are indicated by proper signs in front of the symbols and by the
directions of arrows in diagrams.
Itturnsoutthatweneedmorethanoneheatsource/sinktoconstructaheatengine.Wewillcomebacktothispointlater
inthechapter,whenwecomparedifferentstatementsofthesecondlawofthermodynamics.Forthemoment,weassume
thataheatengineisconstructedbetweenaheatsource(high-temperaturereservoirorhotreservoir)andaheatsink(low-
temperaturereservoirorcoldreservoir),representedschematicallyinFigure4.4.Theengineabsorbsheat Q fromaheat
h
source(hotreservoir)ofKelvintemperature T , usessomeofthatenergytoproduceusefulworkW,andthendiscards
h
theremainingenergyasheat Q c intoaheatsink(coldreservoir)ofKelvintemperature T c. Powerplantsandinternal
combustion engines are examples ofheat engines. Power plants use steam produced at high temperature to drive electric
generators, while exhausting heat to the atmosphere ora nearby bodyofwater in the role ofthe heat sink. Inan internal
combustionengine,ahotgas-airmixtureisusedtopushapiston,andheatisexhaustedtothenearbyatmosphereinasimilar
manner.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 4 | The Second Law of Thermodynamics 149
Figure 4.4 A schematic representation of a heat engine.
Energy flows from the hot reservoir to the cold reservoir while
doing work.
Actualheatengineshavemanydifferentdesigns.Examplesincludeinternalcombustionengines,suchasthoseusedinmost
carstoday,andexternalcombustionengines,suchasthesteamenginesusedinoldsteam-enginetrains.Figure4.5shows
aphotoofanuclearpowerplantinoperation.Theatmospherearoundthereactorsactsasthecoldreservoir,andtheheat
generated from the nuclear reaction provides the heat from the hot reservoir.
Figure 4.5 The heat exhausted from a nuclear power plant
goes to the cooling towers, where it is released into the
atmosphere.
Heat engines operate bycarrying a working substance through a cycle. In a steam power plant, the working substance is
water,whichstartsasaliquid,becomesvaporized,isthenusedtodriveaturbine,andisfinallycondensedbackintothe
liquidstate.Asisthecaseforallworkingsubstancesincyclicprocesses,oncethewaterreturnstoitsinitialstate,itrepeats
the same sequence.
Fornow,weassumethatthecyclesofheatenginesarereversible,sothereisnoenergylosstofrictionorotherirreversible
effects.SupposethattheengineofFigure 4.4goesthroughonecomplete cycleandthat Q
h
, Q c, andWrepresentthe
heatsexchangedandtheworkdoneforthatcycle.Sincetheinitialandfinalstatesofthesystemarethesame, ΔE =0
int
for the cycle. We therefore have from the first law of thermodynamics,
W =Q−ΔE
int
=(Q
h
−Q c)−0,
so that
W =Q
h
−Q c. (4.1)
Themostimportantmeasureofaheatengineisitsefficiency(e),whichissimply“whatwegetout”dividedby“whatwe
put in” during each cycle, as defined by e=W /Q .
out in