# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 587-594
############################################################

12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 575
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concepts of stress and strain in describing elastic deformations of materials
• Describe the types of elastic deformation of objects and materials
A model of a rigid body is an idealized example of an object that does not deform under the actions of external
forces. It is very useful when analyzing mechanical systems—and many physical objects are indeed rigid to a great
extent. The extent to which an object can be perceived as rigid depends on the physical properties of the material
from which it is made. For example, a ping-pong ball made of plastic is brittle, and a tennis ball made of rubber is
elastic when acted upon by squashing forces. However, under other circumstances, both a ping-pong ball and a
tennis ball may bounce well as rigid bodies. Similarly, someone who designs prosthetic limbs may be able to
approximate the mechanics of human limbs by modeling them as rigid bodies; however, the actual combination of
bones and tissues is an elastic medium.
For the remainder of this chapter, we move from consideration of forces that affect the motion of an object to those
that affect an object’s shape. A change in shape due to the application of a force is known as a deformation. Even
very small forces are known to cause some deformation. Deformation is experienced by objects or physical media
under the action of external forces—for example, this may be squashing, squeezing, ripping, twisting, shearing, or
pulling the objects apart. In the language of physics, two terms describe the forces on objects undergoing
deformation: stress and strain.
Stress is a quantity that describes the magnitude of forces that cause deformation. Stress is generally defined as
force per unit area. When forces pull on an object and cause its elongation, like the stretching of an elastic band, we
call such stress a tensile stress. When forces cause a compression of an object, we call it a compressive stress.
When an object is being squeezed from all sides, like a submarine in the depths of an ocean, we call this kind of
stress a bulk stress (or volume stress). In other situations, the acting forces may be neither tensile nor
compressive, and still produce a noticeable deformation. For example, suppose you hold a book tightly between the
palms of your hands, then with one hand you press-and-pull on the front cover away from you, while with the other
hand you press-and-pull on the back cover toward you. In such a case, when deforming forces act tangentially to the
object’s surface, we call them ‘shear’ forces and the stress they cause is called shear stress.
The SI unit of stress is the pascal (Pa). When one newton of force presses on a unit surface area of one meter
squared, the resulting stress is one pascal:
In the Imperial system of units, the unit of stress is ‘psi,’ which stands for ‘pound per square inch’ Another
unit that is often used for bulk stress is the atm (atmosphere). Conversion factors are
An object or medium under stress becomes deformed. The quantity that describes this deformation is called strain.
Strain is given as a fractional change in either length (under tensile stress) or volume (under bulk stress) or
geometry (under shear stress). Therefore, strain is a dimensionless number. Strain under a tensile stress is called
tensile strain, strain under bulk stress is called bulk strain (or volume strain), and that caused by shear stress is
called shear strain.
The greater the stress, the greater the strain; however, the relation between strain and stress does not need to be
linear. Only when stress is sufficiently low is the deformation it causes in direct proportion to the stress value. The
proportionality constant in this relation is called the elastic modulus. In the linear limit of low stress values, the
general relation between stress and strain is
12.33

576 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
As we can see from dimensional analysis of this relation, the elastic modulus has the same physical unit as stress
because strain is dimensionless.
We can also see from Equation 12.33 that when an object is characterized by a large value of elastic modulus, the
effect of stress is small. On the other hand, a small elastic modulus means that stress produces large strain and
noticeable deformation. For example, a stress on a rubber band produces larger strain (deformation) than the same
stress on a steel band of the same dimensions because the elastic modulus for rubber is two orders of magnitude
smaller than the elastic modulus for steel.
The elastic modulus for tensile stress is called Young’s modulus; that for the bulk stress is called the bulk modulus;
and that for shear stress is called the shear modulus. Note that the relation between stress and strain is an
observed relation, measured in the laboratory. Elastic moduli for various materials are measured under various
physical conditions, such as varying temperature, and collected in engineering data tables for reference (Table
12.1). These tables are valuable references for industry and for anyone involved in engineering or construction. In
the next section, we discuss strain-stress relations beyond the linear limit represented by Equation 12.33, in the full
range of stress values up to a fracture point. In the remainder of this section, we study the linear limit expressed by
Equation 12.33.
Material Young’s modulus Bulk modulus Shear modulus
Aluminum 7.0 7.5 2.5
Bone (tension) 1.6 0.8 8.0
Bone (compression) 0.9
Brass 9.0 6.0 3.5
Brick 1.5
Concrete 2.0
Copper 11.0 14.0 4.4
Crown glass 6.0 5.0 2.5
Granite 4.5 4.5 2.0
Hair (human) 1.0
Hardwood 1.5 1.0
Iron 21.0 16.0 7.7
Lead 1.6 4.1 0.6
Marble 6.0 7.0 2.0
Nickel 21.0 17.0 7.8
Polystyrene 3.0
TABLE 12.1 Approximate Elastic Moduli for Selected Materials
Access for free at openstax.org

12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 577
Material Young’s modulus Bulk modulus Shear modulus
Silk 6.0
Spider thread 3.0
Steel 20.0 16.0 7.5
Acetone 0.07
Ethanol 0.09
Glycerin 0.45
Mercury 2.5
Water 0.22
TABLE 12.1 Approximate Elastic Moduli for Selected Materials
Tensile or Compressive Stress, Strain, and Young’s Modulus
Tension or compression occurs when two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude act on an object along only one of
its dimensions, in such a way that the object does not move. One way to envision such a situation is illustrated in
Figure 12.18. A rod segment is either stretched or squeezed by a pair of forces acting along its length and
perpendicular to its cross-section. The net effect of such forces is that the rod changes its length from the original
length that it had before the forces appeared, to a new length L that it has under the action of the forces. This
change in length may be either elongation (when L is larger than the original length or
contraction (when L is smaller than the original length Tensile stress and strain occur when the forces are
stretching an object, causing its elongation, and the length change is positive. Compressive stress and strain
occur when the forces are contracting an object, causing its shortening, and the length change is negative.
In either of these situations, we define stress as the ratio of the deforming force to the cross-sectional area A of
the object being deformed. The symbol that we reserve for the deforming force means that this force acts
perpendicularly to the cross-section of the object. Forces that act parallel to the cross-section do not change the
length of an object. The definition of the tensile stress is
12.34
Tensile strain is the measure of the deformation of an object under tensile stress and is defined as the fractional
change of the object’s length when the object experiences tensile stress
12.35
Compressive stress and strain are defined by the same formulas, Equation 12.34 and Equation 12.35, respectively.
The only difference from the tensile situation is that for compressive stress and strain, we take absolute values of
the right-hand sides in Equation 12.34 and Equation 12.35.

578 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.18 When an object is in either tension or compression, the net force on it is zero, but the object deforms by changing its original
length (a) Tension: The rod is elongated by (b) Compression: The rod is contracted by In both cases, the deforming force acts
along the length of the rod and perpendicular to its cross-section. In the linear range of low stress, the cross-sectional area of the rod does
not change.
Young’s modulus Y is the elastic modulus when deformation is caused by either tensile or compressive stress, and is
defined by Equation 12.33. Dividing this equation by tensile strain, we obtain the expression for Young’s modulus:
12.36
EXAMPLE 12.7
Compressive Stress in a Pillar
A sculpture weighing 10,000 N rests on a horizontal surface at the top of a 6.0-m-tall vertical pillar Figure 12.19.
The pillar’s cross-sectional area is and it is made of granite with a mass density of Find the
compressive stress at the cross-section located 3.0 m below the top of the pillar and the value of the compressive
strain of the top 3.0-m segment of the pillar.
Access for free at openstax.org

12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 579
FIGURE 12.19 Nelson’s Column in Trafalgar Square, London, England. (credit: modification of work by Cristian Bortes)
Strategy
First we find the weight of the 3.0-m-long top section of the pillar. The normal force that acts on the cross-section
located 3.0 m down from the top is the sum of the pillar’s weight and the sculpture’s weight. Once we have the
normal force, we use Equation 12.34 to find the stress. To find the compressive strain, we find the value of Young’s
modulus for granite in Table 12.1 and invert Equation 12.36.
Solution
The volume of the pillar segment with height and cross-sectional area is
With the density of granite the mass of the pillar segment is
The weight of the pillar segment is
The weight of the sculpture is so the normal force on the cross-sectional surface located 3.0 m
below the sculpture is
Therefore, the stress is
Young’s modulus for granite is Therefore, the compressive strain at this
position is
Significance
Notice that the normal force acting on the cross-sectional area of the pillar is not constant along its length, but
varies from its smallest value at the top to its largest value at the bottom of the pillar. Thus, if the pillar has a uniform

580 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
cross-sectional area along its length, the stress is largest at its base.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.9
Find the compressive stress and strain at the base of Nelson’s column.
EXAMPLE 12.8
Stretching a Rod
A 2.0-m-long steel rod has a cross-sectional area of The rod is a part of a vertical support that holds a
heavy 550-kg platform that hangs attached to the rod’s lower end. Ignoring the weight of the rod, what is the tensile
stress in the rod and the elongation of the rod under the stress?
Strategy
First we compute the tensile stress in the rod under the weight of the platform in accordance with Equation 12.34.
Then we invert Equation 12.36 to find the rod’s elongation, using From Table 12.1, Young’s modulus
for steel is
Solution
Substituting numerical values into the equations gives us
Significance
Similarly as in the example with the column, the tensile stress in this example is not uniform along the length of the
rod. Unlike in the previous example, however, if the weight of the rod is taken into consideration, the stress in the
rod is largest at the top and smallest at the bottom of the rod where the equipment is attached.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.10
A 2.0-m-long wire stretches 1.0 mm when subjected to a load. What is the tensile strain in the wire?
Objects can often experience both compressive stress and tensile stress simultaneously Figure 12.20. One example
is a long shelf loaded with heavy books that sags between the end supports under the weight of the books. The top
surface of the shelf is in compressive stress and the bottom surface of the shelf is in tensile stress. Similarly, long
and heavy beams sag under their own weight. In modern building construction, such bending strains can be almost
eliminated with the use of I-beams Figure 12.21.
FIGURE 12.20 (a) An object bending downward experiences tensile stress (stretching) in the upper section and compressive stress
(compressing) in the lower section. (b) Elite weightlifters often bend iron bars temporarily during lifting, as in the 2012 Olympics
Access for free at openstax.org

12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 581
competition. (credit b: modification of work by Oleksandr Kocherzhenko)
FIGURE 12.21 Steel I-beams are used in construction to reduce bending strains. (credit: modification of work by “US Army Corps of
Engineers Europe District”/Flickr)
INTERACTIVE
A heavy box rests on a table supported by three columns. View this demonstration (https://openstax.org/l/
21movebox) to move the box to see how the compression (or tension) in the columns is affected when the box
changes its position.
Bulk Stress, Strain, and Modulus
When you dive into water, you feel a force pressing on every part of your body from all directions. What you are
experiencing then is bulk stress, or in other words, pressure. Bulk stress always tends to decrease the volume
enclosed by the surface of a submerged object. The forces of this “squeezing” are always perpendicular to the
submerged surface Figure 12.22. The effect of these forces is to decrease the volume of the submerged object by an
amount compared with the volume of the object in the absence of bulk stress. This kind of deformation is
called bulk strain and is described by a change in volume relative to the original volume:
12.37
FIGURE 12.22 An object under increasing bulk stress always undergoes a decrease in its volume. Equal forces perpendicular to the surface
act from all directions. The effect of these forces is to decrease the volume by the amount compared to the original volume,
The bulk strain results from the bulk stress, which is a force normal to a surface that presses on the unit surface
area A of a submerged object. This kind of physical quantity, or pressure p, is defined as
12.38
We will study pressure in fluids in greater detail in Fluid Mechanics. An important characteristic of pressure is that it