# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 63-69
############################################################

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 55
Locating an Image in a Plane Mirror
Thelawofreflectiontellsusthattheangleofincidenceisthesameastheangleofreflection.ApplyingthistotrianglesPAB
andQABinFigure2.2andusingbasicgeometryshowsthattheyarecongruenttriangles.ThismeansthatthedistancePB
fromthe object tothe mirror isthe same asthe distance BQfromthe mirror tothe image. The object distance (denoted
d )isthedistancefromthemirrortotheobject(or,moregenerally,fromthecenteroftheopticalelementthatcreatesits
o
image).Similarly,theimagedistance(denoted d )isthedistancefromthemirrortotheimage(or,moregenerally,from
i
thecenteroftheopticalelementthatcreatesit).Ifwemeasuredistancesfromthemirror,thentheobjectandimagearein
opposite directions, so for a plane mirror, the object and image distances should have the opposite signs:
d o=−d
i
. (2.1)
An extended object such as the container in Figure 2.2 can be treated as a collection of points, and we can apply the
method above to locate the image of each point on the extended object, thus forming the extended image.
Multiple Images
Ifanobjectissituatedinfrontoftwomirrors,youmayseeimagesinbothmirrors.Inaddition,theimageinthefirstmirror
mayactasanobjectforthesecondmirror,sothesecondmirrormayformanimageoftheimage.Ifthemirrorsareplaced
paralleltoeachotherandtheobjectisplacedatapointotherthanthemidpointbetweenthem,thenthisprocessofimage-
of-an-imagecontinueswithoutend,asyoumayhavenoticedwhenstandinginahallwaywithmirrorsoneachside.Thisis
showninFigure2.3,whichshowsthreeimagesproducedbytheblueobject.Noticethateachreflectionreversesfrontand
back,justlikepullingaright-handgloveinsideoutproducesaleft-handglove(thisiswhyareflectionofyourrighthand
isalefthand).Thus,thefrontsandbacksofimages1and2arebothinvertedwithrespecttotheobject,andthefrontand
back of image 3 is inverted with respect to image 2, which is the object for image 3.
Figure 2.3 Two parallel mirrors can produce, in theory, an infinite number of images of an object
placed off center between the mirrors. Three of these images are shown here. The front and back of
each image is inverted with respect to its object. Note that the colors are only to identify the images.
For normal mirrors, the color of an image is essentially the same as that of its object.
Youmayhavenoticedthatimage3issmallerthantheobject,whereasimages1and2arethesamesizeastheobject.The
ratiooftheimageheightwithrespecttotheobjectheightiscalledmagnification.Morewillbesaidaboutmagnificationin
the next section.
Infinite reflections may terminate. For instance, two mirrors at right angles form three images, as shown in part (a) of
Figure 2.4. Images 1 and 2 result from rays that reflect from only a single mirror, but image 1,2 is formed by rays that
reflectfrombothmirrors.Thisisshownintheray-tracingdiagraminpart(b)ofFigure2.4.Tofindimage1,2,youhave
to look behind the corner of the two mirrors.

56 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Figure 2.4 Two mirrors can produce multiple images. (a) Three images of a plastic head are visible in the two mirrors at a right
angle. (b) A single object reflecting from two mirrors at a right angle can produce three images, as shown by the green, purple,
and red images.
2.2 | Spherical Mirrors
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe image formation by spherical mirrors.
• Use ray diagrams and the mirror equation to calculate the properties of an image in a spherical
mirror.
Theimageinaplanemirrorhasthesamesizeastheobject,isupright,andisthesamedistancebehindthemirrorasthe
objectisinfrontofthemirror.Acurvedmirror,ontheotherhand,canformimagesthatmaybelargerorsmallerthanthe
objectandmayformeitherinfrontofthemirrororbehindit.Ingeneral,anycurvedsurfacewillformanimage,although
some images make be so distorted as to be unrecognizable (think of fun house mirrors).
Becausecurvedmirrorscancreatesucharichvarietyofimages,theyareusedinmanyopticaldevicesthatfindmanyuses.
We will concentrate on spherical mirrors for the most part, because they are easier to manufacture than mirrors such as
parabolic mirrors and so are more common.
Curved Mirrors
Wecandefinetwogeneraltypesofsphericalmirrors.Ifthereflectingsurfaceistheoutersideofthesphere,themirroris
called aconvex mirror. If the inside surface is the reflecting surface, it is called aconcave mirror.
Symmetryisoneofthemajorhallmarksofmanyopticaldevices,includingmirrorsandlenses.Thesymmetryaxisofsuch
opticalelementsisoftencalledtheprincipalaxisoropticalaxis.Forasphericalmirror,theopticalaxispassesthroughthe
mirror’s center of curvature and the mirror’svertex, as shown inFigure 2.5.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 57
Figure 2.5 A spherical mirror is formed by cutting out a piece of a sphere and silvering either the
inside or outside surface. A concave mirror has silvering on the interior surface (think “cave”), and a
convex mirror has silvering on the exterior surface.
Considerraysthatareparalleltotheopticalaxisofaparabolicmirror,asshowninpart(a)ofFigure 2.6.Followingthe
lawofreflection,theseraysarereflectedsothattheyconvergeatapoint,calledthefocalpoint.Part(b)ofthisfigureshows
asphericalmirrorthatislargecomparedwithitsradiusofcurvature.Forthismirror,thereflectedraysdonotcrossatthe
samepoint,sothemirrordoesnothaveawell-definedfocalpoint.Thisiscalledsphericalaberrationandresultsinablurred
imageofanextendedobject.Part(c)showsasphericalmirrorthatissmallcomparedtoitsradiusofcurvature.Thismirror
isagoodapproximationofaparabolicmirror,soraysthatarriveparalleltotheopticalaxisarereflectedtoawell-defined
focal point. The distance along the optical axis from the mirror to the focal point is called thefocal lengthof the mirror.
Figure 2.6 (a) Parallel rays reflected from a parabolic mirror cross at a single point called the
focal pointF. (b) Parallel rays reflected from a large spherical mirror do not cross at a common
point. (c) If a spherical mirror is small compared with its radius of curvature, it better
approximates the central part of a parabolic mirror, so parallel rays essentially cross at a
common point. The distance along the optical axis from the mirror to the focal point is the focal
lengthfof the mirror.
A convex spherical mirror also has a focal point, as shown in Figure 2.7. Incident rays parallel to the optical axis are
reflected from the mirror and seem to originate from point F at focal length f behind the mirror. Thus, the focal point is
virtual because no real rays actually pass through it; they only appear to originate from it.

58 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Figure 2.7 (a) Rays reflected by a convex spherical mirror: Incident rays of light parallel to the
optical axis are reflected from a convex spherical mirror and seem to originate from a well-defined
focal point at focal distancefon the opposite side of the mirror. The focal point is virtual because no
real rays pass through it. (b) Photograph of a virtual image formed by a convex mirror. (credit b:
modification of work by Jenny Downing)
How does the focal length of a mirror relate to the mirror’s radius of curvature? Figure 2.8 shows a single ray that is
reflectedbyasphericalconcavemirror.Theincidentrayisparalleltotheopticalaxis.Thepointatwhichthereflectedray
crossestheopticalaxisisthefocalpoint.Notethatallincidentraysthatareparalleltotheopticalaxisarereflectedthrough
the focal point—we only show one ray for simplicity. We want to find how the focal length FP (denoted by f) relates to
the radius of curvature of the mirror, R, whose length is R=CF+FP. The law of reflection tells us that angles OXC
andCXFarethesame,andbecausetheincidentrayisparalleltotheopticalaxis,anglesOXCandXCParealsothesame.
Thus,triangle CXFisanisosceles triangle with CF =FX.Iftheangle θ issmall(sothat sinθ≈θ;thisiscalled the
“small-angle approximation”), then FX ≈FP or CF ≈FP. Inserting this into the equation for the radiusR, we get
R=CF+FP=FP+FP=2FP=2f
Figure 2.8 Reflection in a concave mirror. In the small-angle
approximation, a ray that is parallel to the optical axisCPis
reflected through the focal pointFof the mirror.
In other words, in the small-angle approximation, the focal length f of a concave spherical mirror is half of its radius of
curvature,R:
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 59
R (2.2)
f = .
2
In this chapter, we assume that the small-angle approximation (also called the paraxial approximation) is always valid.
Inthisapproximation,allraysareparaxialrays,whichmeansthattheymakeasmallanglewiththeopticalaxisandareat
adistancemuchlessthantheradiusofcurvaturefromtheopticalaxis.Inthiscase,theirangles θ ofreflectionaresmall
angles, so sinθ≈tanθ≈θ.
Using Ray Tracing to Locate Images
Tofindthelocationofanimageformedbyasphericalmirror,wefirstuseraytracing,whichisthetechniqueofdrawing
raysandusingthelawofreflectiontodeterminethereflectedrays(later,forlenses,weusethelawofrefractiontodetermine
refracted rays). Combined with some basic geometry, we can use ray tracing to find the focal point, the image location,
andotherinformationabouthowamirrormanipulateslight.Infact,wealreadyusedraytracingabovetolocatethefocal
pointofsphericalmirrors,ortheimagedistanceofflatmirrors.Tolocatetheimageofanobject,youmustlocateatleast
twopointsoftheimage.Locatingeachpointrequiresdrawingatleasttworaysfromapointontheobjectandconstructing
their reflected rays. The point at which the reflected rays intersect, either in real space or in virtual space, is where the
corresponding point of the image is located. To make ray tracing easier, we concentrate on four “principal” rays whose
reflections are easy to construct.
Figure 2.9 shows a concave mirror and a convex mirror, each with an arrow-shaped object in front of it. These are the
objectswhoseimageswewanttolocatebyraytracing.Todoso,wedrawraysfrompointQthatisontheobjectbutnoton
theopticalaxis.Wechoosetodrawourrayfromthetipoftheobject.Principalray1goesfrompointQandtravelsparallel
totheopticalaxis.Thereflectionofthisraymustpassthroughthefocalpoint,asdiscussedabove.Thus,fortheconcave
mirror,thereflectionofprincipalray1goesthroughfocalpointF,asshowninpart(b)ofthefigure.Fortheconvexmirror,
the backward extension of the reflection of principal ray 1 goes through the focal point (i.e., a virtual focus). Principal
ray 2 travels first on the line going through the focal point and then is reflected back along a line parallel to the optical
axis.Principalray3travelstowardthecenterofcurvatureofthemirror,soitstrikesthemirroratnormalincidenceandis
reflected back along the line from which it came. Finally, principal ray 4 strikes the vertex of the mirror and is reflected
symmetrically about the optical axis.

60 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Figure 2.9 The four principal rays shown for both (a) a concave mirror and (b) a convex mirror. The
image forms where the rays intersect (for real images) or where their backward extensions intersect (for
virtual images).
Thefourprincipalraysintersectatpoint Q′,whichiswheretheimageofpointQislocated.Tolocatepoint Q′,drawing
anytwooftheseprinciplerayswouldsuffice.Wearethusfreetochoosewhicheveroftheprincipalrayswedesiretolocate
the image. Drawing more than two principal rays is sometimes useful to verify that the ray tracing is correct.
Tocompletelylocatetheextendedimage,weneedtolocateasecondpointintheimage,sothatweknowhowtheimage
isoriented.Todothis,wetracetheprincipalraysfromthebaseoftheobject.Inthiscase,allfourprincipalraysrunalong
theopticalaxis,reflectfromthemirror,andthenrunbackalongtheopticalaxis.Thedifficultyisthat,becausetheserays
arecollinear,wecannotdetermineauniquepointwheretheyintersect.Allweknowisthatthebaseoftheimageisonthe
opticalaxis.However,becausethemirrorissymmetricalfromtoptobottom,itdoesnotchangetheverticalorientationof
theobject.Thus,becausetheobjectisvertical,theimagemustbevertical.Therefore,theimageofthebaseoftheobjectis
on the optical axis directly above the image of the tip, as drawn in the figure.
For the concave mirror, the extended image in this case forms between the focal point and the center of curvature of the
mirror.Itisinvertedwithrespecttotheobject,isarealimage,andissmallerthantheobject.Werewetomovetheobject
closertoorfartherfromthemirror,thecharacteristicsoftheimagewouldchange.Forexample,weshow,asalaterexercise,
thatanobjectplacedbetweenaconcavemirroranditsfocalpointleadstoavirtualimagethatisuprightandlargerthanthe
object.Fortheconvexmirror,theextendedimageformsbetweenthefocalpointandthemirror.Itisuprightwithrespectto
the object, is a virtual image, and is smaller than the object.
Summary of Ray-Tracing Rules
Ray tracing is very useful for mirrors. The rules for ray tracing are summarized here for reference:
• Araytravellingparalleltotheopticalaxisofasphericalmirrorisreflectedalongalinethatgoesthroughthefocal
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9