# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 104-111
############################################################

96 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
obj obj
d d
m obj =− i ≈ − i (linear magnification y objective)
obj obj
d f
o
M eye =1 + 25cm (angular magnification y eyepiece)
eye
f
Here, f obj and f eye arethefocallengthsoftheobjectiveandtheeyepiece,respectively.Weassumethatthefinalimage
is formed at the near point of the eye, providing the largest magnification. Note that the angular magnification of the
eyepieceisthesameasobtainedearlierforthesimplemagnifyingglass.Thisshouldnotbesurprising,becausetheeyepiece
is essentially a magnifying glass, and the same physics applies here. The net magnification M of the compound
net
microscope is the product of the linear magnification of the objective and the angular magnification of the eyepiece:
d obj⎛f eye +25cm ⎞ (2.34)
M =m obj M eye =− i ⎝ ⎠ .
net obj eye
f f
Example 2.11
Microscope Magnification
Calculatethemagnificationofanobjectplaced6.20mmfromacompoundmicroscopethathasa6.00mm-focal
length objective and a 50.0 mm-focal length eyepiece. The objective and eyepiece are separated by 23.0 cm.
Strategy
ThissituationissimilartothatshowninFigure2.38.Tofindtheoverallmagnification,wemustknowthelinear
magnificationoftheobjectiveandtheangularmagnificationoftheeyepiece.WecanuseEquation2.34,butwe
need to use the thin-lens equation to find the image distance d obj of the objective.
i
Solution
Solving the thin-lens equation for d obj gives
i
−1
⎛ ⎞
d obj =⎜ 1 − 1 ⎟
i ⎝f obj d obj⎠
o
−1
⎛ 1 1 ⎞
= − =186mm=18.6cm
⎝6.00mm 6.20mm⎠
Inserting this result into Equation 2.34 along with the known values f obj =6.20mm=0.620cm and
f eye =50.0mm=5.00cm gives
obj eye
d (f +25cm)
M =− i
net obj eye
f f
(18.6cm)(5.00cm+25cm)
=−
(0.600cm)(5.00cm)
=−186
Significance
Boththeobjectiveandtheeyepiececontributetotheoverallmagnification,whichislargeandnegative,consistent
withFigure2.38,wheretheimageisseentobelargeandinverted.Inthiscase,theimageisvirtualandinverted,
which cannot happen for a single element (seeFigure 2.26).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 97
Figure 2.39 A compound microscope with the image created at infinity.
Wenowcalculatethemagnifyingpowerofamicroscopewhentheimageisatinfinity,asshowninFigure2.39,because
thismakesforthemostrelaxedviewing.Themagnifyingpowerofthemicroscopeistheproductoflinearmagnification
m obj oftheobjectiveandtheangularmagnification M eye oftheeyepiece.Weknowthat m obj =−d obj /d obj andfrom
i o
the thin-lens equation we obtain
obj obj obj obj (2.35)
m obj =−
d
i =1−
d
i =
f −d
i .
obj obj obj
d f f
o
Ifthefinalimageisatinfinity,thentheimagecreatedbytheobjectivemustbelocatedatthefocalpointoftheeyepiece.This
maybeseenbyconsideringthethin-lensequationwith d =∞ orbyrecallingthatraysthatpassthroughthefocalpoint
i
exitthelensparalleltoeachother,whichisequivalenttofocusingatinfinity.Formanymicroscopes,thedistancebetween
the image-side focal point ofthe objective andthe object-side focal point ofthe eyepiece isstandardized at L=16cm.
Thisdistanceiscalledthetubelengthofthemicroscope.FromFigure 2.39,weseethat L= f obj −d obj.Insertingthis
i
intoEquation 2.35gives
m obj = L = 16cm . (2.36)
obj obj
f f
Wenowneedtocalculatetheangularmagnificationoftheeyepiecewiththeimageatinfinity.Todoso,wetaketheratio
of the angle θ subtended by the image to the angle θ subtended by the object at the near point of the eye
image object
(this is the closest that the unaided eye can view the object, and thus this is the position where the object will form the
largestimageontheretinaoftheunaidedeye).UsingFigure2.39andworkinginthesmall-angleapproximation,wehave
θ ≈h obj /f eye and θ ≈h obj /25cm,where h obj istheheightoftheimageformedbytheobjective,whichis
image i object i i
the object of the eyepiece. Thus, the angular magnification of the eyepiece is
θ h obj (2.37)
M eye = image = i 25cm = 25cm .
θ object f eye h obj f eye
i
The net magnifying power of the compound microscope with the image at infinity is therefore

98 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
obj eye (16cm)(25cm) (2.38)
M =m M =− .
net obj eye
f f
The focal distances must be in centimeters. The minus sign indicates that the final image is inverted. Note that the only
variablesintheequationarethefocaldistancesoftheeyepieceandtheobjective,whichmakesthisequationparticularly
useful.
Telescopes
Telescopes are meant for viewing distant objects and produce an image that is larger than the image produced in the
unaidedeye.Telescopesgatherfarmorelightthantheeye,allowingdimobjectstobeobservedwithgreatermagnification
and better resolution. Telescopes were invented around 1600,and Galileo was the first to use them to study the heavens,
withmonumentalconsequences.HeobservedthemoonsofJupiter,thecratersandmountainsonthemoon,thedetailsof
sunspots, and the fact that the Milky Way is composed of a vast number of individual stars.
Figure 2.40 (a) Galileo made telescopes with a convex objective and a concave eyepiece. These produce an
upright image and are used in spyglasses. (b) Most simple refracting telescopes have two convex lenses. The
objective forms a real, inverted image at (or just within) the focal plane of the eyepiece. This image serves as the
object for the eyepiece. The eyepiece forms a virtual, inverted image that is magnified.
Part(a)ofFigure 2.40showsarefractingtelescopemadeoftwolenses.Thefirstlens,calledtheobjective,formsareal
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 99
imagewithinthefocallengthofthesecondlens,whichiscalledtheeyepiece.Theimageoftheobjectivelensservesasthe
objectfortheeyepiece,whichformsamagnifiedvirtualimagethatisobservedbytheeye.ThisdesigniswhatGalileoused
to observe the heavens.
Althoughthearrangementofthelensesinarefractingtelescopelookssimilartothatinamicroscope,thereareimportant
differences.Inatelescope,therealobjectisfarawayandtheintermediateimageissmallerthantheobject.Inamicroscope,
therealobjectisverycloseandtheintermediateimageislargerthantheobject.Inboththetelescopeandthemicroscope,
the eyepiece magnifies the intermediate image; in the telescope, however, this is the only magnification.
The most common two-lens telescope is shown in part (b) of the figure. The object is so far from the telescope that it
is essentially at infinity compared with the focal lengths of the lenses (d obj ≈∞), so the incoming rays are essentially
o
parallelandfocusonthefocalplane.Thus,thefirstimageisproducedat d obj = f obj,asshowninthefigure,andisnot
i
largecomparedwithwhatyoumightseebylookingdirectlyattheobject.However,theeyepieceofthetelescopeeyepiece
(likethemicroscopeeyepiece)allowsyoutogetnearerthanyournearpointtothisfirstimageandsomagnifiesit(because
you are near to it, it subtends a larger angle from your eye and so forms a larger image on your retina). As for a simple
magnifier,theangularmagnificationofatelescopeistheratiooftheanglesubtendedbytheimage[θ inpart(b)]to
image
the angle subtended by the real object [θ in part (b)]:
object
θ (2.39)
M = image .
θ
object
To obtain an expression for the magnification that involves only the lens parameters, note that the focal plane of the
objectivelensliesveryclosetothefocalplanoftheeyepiece.Ifweassumethattheseplanesaresuperposed,wehavethe
situation shown inFigure 2.41.
Figure 2.41 The focal plane of the objective lens of a telescope is very near to the focal plane of the eyepiece. The angle
θ subtended by the image viewed through the eyepiece is larger than the angle θ subtended by the object when
image object
viewed with the unaided eye.
Wefurtherassumethattheangles θ and θ aresmall,sothatthesmall-angleapproximationholds(tanθ≈θ).
object image
If the image formed at the focal plane has heighth, then
h
θ ≈tanθ =
object object obj
f
θ ≈tanθ =
−h
image image eye
f

100 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
where the minus sign is introduced because the height is negative if we measure both angles in the counterclockwise
direction. Inserting these expressions intoEquation 2.39gives
−h f obj f obj (2.40)
M = i =− .
f eye h i f eye
Thus,toobtainthegreatestangularmagnification,itisbesttohaveanobjectivewithalongfocallengthandaneyepiece
withashortfocallength.ThegreatertheangularmagnificationM,thelargeranobjectwillappearwhenviewedthrougha
telescope,makingmoredetailsvisible.Limitstoobservabledetailsareimposedbymanyfactors,includinglensqualityand
atmosphericdisturbance.Typicaleyepieceshavefocallengthsof2.5cmor1.25cm.Iftheobjectiveofthetelescopehasa
focallengthof1meter,thentheseeyepiecesresultinmagnificationsof 40× and 80× ,respectively.Thus,theangular
magnifications make the image appear 40 times or 80 times closer than the real object.
Theminussigninthemagnificationindicatestheimageisinverted,whichisunimportantforobservingthestarsbutisareal
problemforotherapplications,suchastelescopesonshipsortelescopicgunsights.Ifanuprightimageisneeded,Galileo’s
arrangementinpart(a)ofFigure 2.40canbeused.Butamorecommonarrangementistouseathirdconvexlensasan
eyepiece, increasing the distance between the first two and inverting the image once again, as seen inFigure 2.42.
Figure 2.42 This arrangement of three lenses in a telescope produces an upright final image. The first two lenses are far
enough apart that the second lens inverts the image of the first. The third lens acts as a magnifier and keeps the image upright
and in a location that is easy to view.
Thelargestrefractingtelescopeintheworldisthe40-inchdiameterYerkestelescopelocatedatLakeGeneva,Wisconsin
(Figure 2.43), and operated by the University of Chicago.
Itisverydifficultandexpensivetobuildlargerefractingtelescopes.Youneedlargedefect-freelenses,whichinitselfisa
technicallydemandingtask.Arefractingtelescopebasicallylookslikeatubewithasupportstructuretorotateitindifferent
directions.Arefractingtelescopesuffersfromseveralproblems.Theaberrationoflensescausestheimagetobeblurred.
Also, as the lenses become thicker for larger lenses, more light is absorbed, making faint stars more difficult to observe.
Large lenses are also very heavy and deform under their own weight. Some of these problems with refracting telescopes
areaddressedbyavoidingrefractionforcollectinglightandinsteadusingacurvedmirrorinitsplace,asdevisedbyIsaac
Newton. These telescopes are called reflecting telescopes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 101
Figure 2.43 In 1897, the Yerkes Observatory in Wisconsin (USA) built
a large refracting telescope with an objective lens that is 40 inches in
diameter and has a tube length of 62 feet. (credit: Yerkes Observatory,
University of Chicago)
Reflecting Telescopes
IsaacNewtondesignedthefirstreflectingtelescopearound1670tosolvetheproblemofchromaticaberrationthathappens
inallrefractingtelescopes.Inchromaticaberration,lightofdifferentcolorsrefractsbyslightlydifferentamountsinthelens.
Asaresult,arainbowappearsaroundtheimageandtheimageappearsblurred.Inthereflectingtelescope,lightraysfroma
distantsourcefalluponthesurfaceofaconcavemirrorfixedatthebottomendofthetube.Theuseofamirrorinsteadofa
lenseliminateschromaticaberration.Theconcavemirrorfocusestheraysonitsfocalplane.Thedesignproblemishowto
observethefocusedimage.Newtonusedadesigninwhichthefocusedlightfromtheconcavemirrorwasreflectedtoone
sideofthetubeintoaneyepiece[part(a)ofFigure2.44].Thisarrangementiscommoninmanyamateurtelescopesandis
called theNewtonian design.
Sometelescopesreflectthelightbacktowardthemiddleoftheconcavemirrorusingaconvexmirror.Inthisarrangement,
thelight-gatheringconcavemirrorhasaholeinthemiddle[part(b)ofthefigure].Thelightthenisincidentonaneyepiece
lens.Thisarrangement oftheobjective andeyepiece iscalled theCassegraindesign.Mostbigtelescopes, includingthe
Hubble space telescope, are of this design. Other arrangements are also possible. In some telescopes, a light detector is
placed right at the spot where light is focused by the curved mirror.
Figure 2.44 Reflecting telescopes: (a) In the Newtonian design, the eyepiece is located at the side of the telescope; (b) in the
Cassegrain design, the eyepiece is located past a hole in the primary mirror.
Most astronomical research telescopes are now of the reflecting type. One of the earliest large telescopes of this kind is
the Hale 200-inch (or 5-meter) telescope built on Mount Palomar in southern California, which has a 200 inch-diameter
mirror.Oneofthelargesttelescopesintheworldisthe10-meterKecktelescopeattheKeckObservatoryonthesummitof

102 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
thedormantMaunaKeavolcanoinHawaii.TheKeckObservatoryoperatestwo10-metertelescopes.Eachisnotasingle
mirror, but is instead made up of 36 hexagonal mirrors. Furthermore, the two telescopes on the Keck can work together,
whichincreasestheirpowertoaneffective85-metermirror.TheHubbletelescope(Figure2.45)isanotherlargereflecting
telescope with a 2.4 meter-diameter primary mirror. The Hubble was put into orbit around Earth in 1990.
Figure 2.45 The Hubble space telescope as seen from the Space Shuttle Discovery. (credit:
modification of work by NASA)
The angular magnification M of a reflecting telescope is also given by Equation 2.36. For a spherical mirror, the focal
lengthishalftheradiusofcurvature,somakingalargeobjectivemirrornotonlyhelpsthetelescopecollectmorelightbut
also increases the magnification of the image.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9