# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 57-64
############################################################

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 47
blast furnace glows from yellow to white. Infrared radiation is the predominant form radiated by objects cooler than the
electricelementandthesteel.Theradiatedenergyasafunctionofwavelengthdependsonitsintensity,whichisrepresented
in Figure 1.29 by the height of the distribution. (Electromagnetic Waves explains more about the electromagnetic
spectrum,andPhotonsandMatterWaves(http://cnx.org/content/m58757/latest/)discusseswhythedecreasein
wavelength corresponds to an increase in energy.)
Figure 1.29 (a) A graph of the spectrum of electromagnetic waves emitted from an ideal
radiator at three different temperatures. The intensity or rate of radiation emission increases
dramatically with temperature, and the spectrum shifts down in wavelength toward the visible
and ultraviolet parts of the spectrum. The shaded portion denotes the visible part of the spectrum.
It is apparent that the shift toward the ultraviolet with temperature makes the visible appearance
shift from red to white to blue as temperature increases. (b) Note the variations in color
corresponding to variations in flame temperature.
Therateofheattransferbyradiationalsodependsontheobject’scolor.Blackisthemosteffective,andwhiteistheleast
effective.Onaclearsummerday,blackasphaltinaparkinglotishotterthanadjacentgraysidewalk,becauseblackabsorbs
betterthangray(Figure 1.30).Thereverseisalsotrue—blackradiatesbetterthangray.Thus,onaclearsummernight,
the asphalt is colder than the gray sidewalk, because black radiates the energy more rapidly than gray. A perfectly black
object would be an ideal radiator and an ideal absorber, as it would capture all the radiation that falls on it. In contrast,
aperfectlywhiteobjectoraperfectmirrorwouldreflectallradiation,andaperfectlytransparentobjectwouldtransmitit
all(Figure 1.31).Suchobjectswouldnotemitanyradiation.Mathematically,thecolorisrepresentedbytheemissivity
e. A “blackbody” radiator would have an e=1, whereas a perfect reflector or transmitter would have e=0. For real
examples,tungstenlightbulbfilamentshaveaneofabout0.5,andcarbonblack(amaterialusedinprintertoner)hasan
emissivity of about 0.95.

48 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
Figure 1.30 The darker pavement is hotter than the lighter pavement (much more of the ice on the right has
melted), although both have been in the sunlight for the same time. The thermal conductivities of the pavements are
the same.
Figure 1.31 A black object is a good absorber and a good radiator, whereas a white, clear, or silver object is a
poor absorber and a poor radiator.
Toseethat,considerasilverobjectandablackobjectthatcanexchangeheatbyradiationandareinthermalequilibrium.
We know from experience that they will stay in equilibrium (the result of a principle that will be discussed at length in
SecondLawofThermodynamics).Fortheblackobject’stemperaturetostayconstant,itmustemitasmuchradiation
asitabsorbs,soitmustbeasgoodatradiatingasabsorbing.Similarconsiderationsshowthatthesilverobjectmustradiate
as little as it absorbs. Thus, one property, emissivity, controls both radiation and absorption.
Finally,theradiatedheatisproportionaltotheobject’ssurfacearea,sinceeverypartofthesurfaceradiates.Ifyouknock
apart the coals of a fire, the radiation increases noticeably due to an increase in radiating surface area.
The rate of heat transfer by emitted radiation is described by theStefan-Boltzmann law of radiation:
P=σAeT4,
where σ =5.67×10 −8 J/s·m2·K4 istheStefan-Boltzmannconstant,acombinationoffundamentalconstantsofnature;
Ais the surface area of the object; andTis its temperature in kelvins.
The proportionality to the fourth power of the absolute temperature is a remarkably strong temperature dependence. It
allows the detection of even small temperature variations. Images called thermographs can be used medically to detect
regionsofabnormallyhightemperatureinthebody,perhapsindicativeofdisease.Similartechniquescanbeusedtodetect
heatleaksinhomes(Figure1.32),optimizeperformanceofblastfurnaces,improvecomfortlevelsinworkenvironments,
and even remotely map Earth’s temperature profile.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 49
Figure 1.32 A thermograph of part of a building shows temperature variations,
indicating where heat transfer to the outside is most severe. Windows are a major
region of heat transfer to the outside of homes. (credit: US Army)
TheStefan-Boltzmannequationneedsonlyslightrefinementtodealwithasimplecaseofanobject’sabsorptionofradiation
from its surroundings. Assuming that an object with a temperature T is surrounded by an environment with uniform
1
temperature T , thenet rate of heat transfer by radiationis
2
P =σeA⎛T 4−T 4⎞ , (1.10)
net ⎝ 2 1 ⎠
whereeistheemissivityoftheobjectalone.Inotherwords,itdoesnotmatterwhetherthesurroundingsarewhite,gray,
or black: The balance of radiation into and out of the object depends on how well it emits and absorbs radiation. When
T >T , the quantity P is positive, that is, the net heat transfer is from hot to cold.
2 1 net
Beforedoinganexample,wehaveacomplicationtodiscuss:differentemissivitiesatdifferentwavelengths.Ifthefraction
ofincidentradiationanobjectreflectsisthesameatallvisiblewavelengths,theobjectisgray;ifthefractiondependson
thewavelength,theobjecthassomeothercolor.Forinstance,aredorreddishobjectreflectsredlightmorestronglythan
othervisiblewavelengths.Becauseitabsorbslessred,itradiateslessredwhenhot.Differentialreflectionandabsorptionof
wavelengthsoutsidethevisiblerangehavenoeffectonwhatwesee,buttheymayhavephysicallyimportanteffects.Skinis
averygoodabsorberandemitterofinfraredradiation,havinganemissivityof0.97intheinfraredspectrum.Thus,inspite
oftheobviousvariationsinskincolor,weareallnearlyblackintheinfrared.Thishighinfraredemissivityiswhywecan
soeasilyfeelradiationonourskin.Itisalsothebasisfortheeffectivenessofnight-visionscopesusedbylawenforcement
and the military to detect human beings.
Example 1.13
Calculating the Net Heat Transfer of a Person
What is the rate of heat transfer by radiation of an unclothed person standing in a dark room whose ambient
temperatureis 22.0°C?Thepersonhasanormalskintemperatureof 33.0°C andasurfaceareaof 1.50m2.
The emissivity of skin is 0.97 in the infrared, the part of the spectrum where the radiation takes place.
Strategy
We can solve this by using the equation for the rate of radiative heat transfer.

50 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
Solution
Insert the temperature values T =295K and T =306K, so that
2 1
Q ⎛ ⎞
=σeA T 4−T 4
t ⎝ 2 1 ⎠
=
⎛
5.67×10
−8 J/s·m2·K4⎞
(0.97)
⎛ 1.50m2⎞⎡ (295K)4−(306K)4⎤
⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠⎣ ⎦
=−99J/s=−99W.
Significance
Thisvalueisasignificantrateofheattransfertotheenvironment(notetheminussign),consideringthataperson
atrestmayproduceenergyattherateof125Wandthatconductionandconvectionarealsotransferringenergyto
theenvironment.Indeed,wewouldprobablyexpectthispersontofeelcold.Clothingsignificantlyreducesheat
transfer to the environment by all mechanisms, because clothing slows down both conduction and convection,
and has a lower emissivity (especially if it is light-colored) than skin.
TheaveragetemperatureofEarthisthesubjectofmuchcurrentdiscussion.EarthisinradiativecontactwithboththeSun
anddarkspace,sowecannotusetheequationforanenvironmentatauniformtemperature. Earthreceivesalmostallits
energyfromradiationoftheSunandreflectssomeofitbackintoouterspace.Conversely,darkspaceisverycold,about3
K,sothatEarthradiatesenergyintothedarksky.Therateofheattransferfromsoilandgrassescanbesorapidthatfrost
may occur on clear summer evenings, even in warm latitudes.
The average temperature of Earth is determined by its energy balance. To a first approximation, it is the temperature at
which Earth radiates heat to space as fast as it receives energy from the Sun.
An important parameter in calculating the temperature of Earth is its emissivity (e). On average, it is about 0.65, but
calculationofthisvalueiscomplicatedbythegreatday-to-dayvariationinthehighlyreflectivecloudcoverage.Because
cloudshaveloweremissivitythaneitheroceansorlandmasses,theyreflectsomeoftheradiationbacktothesurface,greatly
reducingheattransferintodarkspace,justastheygreatlyreduceheattransferintotheatmosphereduringtheday.There
is negative feedback (in which a change produces an effect that opposes that change) between clouds and heat transfer;
highertemperaturesevaporatemorewatertoformmoreclouds,whichreflectmoreradiationbackintospace,reducingthe
temperature.
Theoften-mentionedgreenhouseeffectisdirectlyrelatedtothevariationofEarth’semissivitywithwavelength(Figure
1.33).ThegreenhouseeffectisanaturalphenomenonresponsibleforprovidingtemperaturessuitableforlifeonEarthand
formakingVenusunsuitableforhumanlife.MostoftheinfraredradiationemittedfromEarthisabsorbedbycarbondioxide
(CO )andwater(H O)intheatmosphereandthenre-radiatedintoouterspaceorbacktoEarth.Re-radiationbackto
2 2
Earthmaintainsitssurfacetemperatureabout 40°C higherthanitwouldbeiftherewerenoatmosphere.(Theglasswalls
and roof of a greenhouse increase the temperature inside by blocking convective heat losses, not radiative losses.)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 51
Figure 1.33 The greenhouse effect is the name given to the increase of Earth’s
temperature due to absorption of radiation in the atmosphere. The atmosphere is
transparent to incoming visible radiation and most of the Sun’s infrared. The Earth
absorbs that energy and re-emits it. Since Earth’s temperature is much lower than the
Sun’s, it re-emits the energy at much longer wavelengths, in the infrared. The
atmosphere absorbs much of that infrared radiation and radiates about half of the
energy back down, keeping Earth warmer than it would otherwise be. The amount of
trapping depends on concentrations of trace gases such as carbon dioxide, and an
increase in the concentration of these gases increases Earth’s surface temperature.
Thegreenhouseeffectiscentraltothediscussionofglobalwarmingduetoemissionofcarbondioxideandmethane(and
othergreenhousegases)intoEarth’satmospherefromindustry,transportation,andfarming.Changesinglobalclimatecould
leadtomoreintensestorms,precipitationchanges(affectingagriculture),reductioninrainforestbiodiversity,andrisingsea
levels.
Youcanexploreasimulationofthegreenhouseeffect(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21simgreeneff)
thattakesthepointofviewthattheatmospherescatters(redirects)infraredradiationratherthanabsorbingitand
reradiatingit.Youmaywanttorunthesimulationfirstwithnogreenhousegasesintheatmosphereandthenlook
at how adding greenhouse gases affects the infrared radiation from the Earth and the Earth’s temperature.
Problem-Solving Strategy: Effects of Heat Transfer
1. Examine the situation to determine what type of heat transfer is involved.
2. Identify the type(s) of heat transfer—conduction, convection, or radiation.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
4. Make a list of what is given or what can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown).
6. For conduction, use the equation P=
kAΔT
. Table 1.5 lists thermal conductivities. For convection,
d
determinetheamountofmattermovedandtheequation Q=mcΔT,alongwith Q=mL or Q=mL ifa
f V

52 Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat
substancechangesphase.Forradiation,theequation P =σeA⎛T 4−T 4⎞ givesthenetheattransferrate.
net ⎝ 2 1 ⎠
7. Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions
complete with units.
8. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable. Does it make sense?
1.9 Check Your Understanding How much greater is the rate of heat radiation when a body is at the
temperature 40°C than when it is at the temperature 20°C?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 1 | Temperature and Heat 53
CHAPTER 1 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
absolute temperature scale scale, such as Kelvin, with a zero point that is absolute zero
absolute zero temperature at which the average kinetic energy of molecules is zero
calorie (cal) energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 g of water by 1.00°C
calorimeter container that prevents heat transfer in or out
calorimetry study of heat transfer inside a container impervious to heat
Celsius scale temperature scale in which the freezing point of water is 0°C and the boiling point of water is 100°C
coefficient of linear expansion (α) material property that gives the change in length, per unit length, per 1-°C
change in temperature; a constant used in the calculation of linear expansion; the coefficient of linear expansion
depends to some degree on the temperature of the material
coefficient of volume expansion (β) similar to α but gives the change in volume, per unit volume, per 1-°C
change in temperature
conduction heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact
convection heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of fluid
critical point foragivensubstance,thecombinationoftemperatureandpressureabovewhichtheliquidandgasphases
are indistinguishable
critical pressure pressure at the critical point
critical temperature temperature at the critical point
degree Celsius (°C) unit on the Celsius temperature scale
degree Fahrenheit (°F) unit on the Fahrenheit temperature scale
emissivity measure of how well an object radiates
Fahrenheit scale temperature scale in which the freezing point of water is 32°F and the boiling point of water is
212°F
greenhouse effect warmingoftheearththatisduetogasessuchascarbondioxideandmethanethatabsorbinfrared
radiation from Earth’s surface and reradiate it in all directions, thus sending some of it back toward Earth
heat energy transferred solely due to a temperature difference
heat of fusion energyperunitmassrequiredtochangeasubstancefromthesolidphasetotheliquidphase,orreleased
when the substance changes from liquid to solid
heat of sublimation energy per unit mass required to change a substance from the solid phase to the vapor phase
heat of vaporization energy per unit mass required to change a substance from the liquid phase to the vapor phase
heat transfer movement of energy from one place or material to another as a result of a difference in temperature
Kelvin scale (K) temperature scale in which 0 K is the lowest possible temperature, representing absolute zero
kilocalorie (kcal) energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of water between 14.5°C and 15.5°C
latent heat coefficient general term for the heats of fusion, vaporization, and sublimation
mechanical equivalent of heat work needed to produce the same effects as heat transfer
net rate of heat transfer by radiation P =σeA⎛T 4−T 4⎞
net ⎝ 2 1 ⎠
phase diagram graph of pressure vs. temperature of a particular substance, showing at which pressures and
temperatures the phases of the substance occur