# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 411-418
############################################################

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 401
Figure 9.13 A potential provided by a battery is applied to a
segment of a conductor with a cross-sectional areaAand a
lengthL.
The magnitude of the electrical field across the segment of the conductor is equal to the voltage divided by the length,
E=V/L,andthe magnitude ofthe current density isequal tothe current divided bythe cross-sectional area, J =I/A.
Usingthisinformationandrecallingthattheelectricalfieldisproportionaltotheresistivityandthecurrentdensity,wecan
see that the voltage is proportional to the current:
E= ρJ
V I
= ρ
L A
⎛ L⎞
V = ρ I.
⎝ A⎠
Resistance
The ratio of the voltage to the current is defined as theresistanceR:
V (9.8)
R≡ .
I
Theresistanceofacylindricalsegmentofaconductorisequaltotheresistivityofthematerialtimesthelengthdivided
by the area:
V L (9.9)
R≡ = ρ .
I A
The unit of resistance is the ohm, Ω. For a given voltage, the higher the resistance, the lower the current.
Resistors
A common component in electronic circuits is the resistor. The resistor can be used to reduce current flow or provide a
voltagedrop.Figure 9.14showsthesymbolsusedforaresistorinschematicdiagramsofacircuit.Twocommonlyused
standards for circuit diagrams are provided by the American National Standard Institute (ANSI, pronounced “AN-see”)
andtheInternationalElectrotechnicalCommission(IEC).Bothsystemsarecommonlyused.WeusetheANSIstandardin
thistextforitsvisualrecognition,butwenotethatforlarger,morecomplexcircuits,theIECstandardmayhaveacleaner
presentation, making it easier to read.
Figure 9.14 Symbols for a resistor used in circuit diagrams. (a)
The ANSI symbol; (b) the IEC symbol.

402 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
Material and shape dependence of resistance
Aresistorcanbemodeledasacylinderwithacross-sectionalareaAandalengthL,madeofamaterialwitharesistivity ρ
L
(Figure 9.15). The resistance of the resistor is R= ρ .
A
Figure 9.15 A model of a resistor as a uniform cylinder of lengthLand cross-
sectional areaA. Its resistance to the flow of current is analogous to the resistance
posed by a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the greater its resistance.
The larger its cross-sectional areaA, the smaller its resistance.
Themostcommonmaterialusedtomakearesistoriscarbon.Acarbontrackiswrappedaroundaceramiccore,andtwo
copperleadsareattached.Asecondtypeofresistoristhemetalfilmresistor,whichalsohasaceramiccore.Thetrackis
madefromametaloxidematerial,whichhassemiconductivepropertiessimilartocarbon.Again,copperleadsareinserted
intotheendsoftheresistor.Theresistoristhenpaintedandmarkedforidentification.Aresistorhasfourcoloredbands,as
shown inFigure 9.16.
Figure 9.16 Many resistors resemble the figure shown above. The four bands
are used to identify the resistor. The first two colored bands represent the first
two digits of the resistance of the resistor. The third color is the multiplier. The
fourth color represents the tolerance of the resistor. The resistor shown has a
resistance of 20×10 5 Ω±10%.
Resistances range over many orders of magnitude. Some ceramic insulators, such as those used to support power lines,
haveresistancesof 1012 Ω ormore.Adrypersonmayhaveahand-to-footresistanceof 10 5 Ω,whereastheresistance
ofthehumanheartisabout 10 3 Ω.Ameter-longpieceoflarge-diametercopperwiremayhavearesistanceof 10 −5 Ω,
andsuperconductorshavenoresistanceatallatlowtemperatures.Aswehaveseen,resistanceisrelatedtotheshapeofan
object and the material of which it is composed.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 403
Theresistanceofanobjectalsodependsontemperature,since R isdirectlyproportionalto ρ. Foracylinder,weknow
0
L
R= ρ ,soifLandAdonotchangegreatlywithtemperature,Rhasthesametemperaturedependenceas ρ. (Examination
A
of the coefficients of linear expansion shows them to be about two orders of magnitude less than typical temperature
coefficients of resistivity, so the effect of temperature onLandAis about two orders of magnitude less than on ρ.) Thus,
R=R (1+αΔT) (9.10)
0
is the temperature dependence of the resistance of an object, where R is the original resistance (usually taken to be
0
20.00°C) andRistheresistanceafteratemperaturechange ΔT. Thecolorcodegivestheresistanceoftheresistorata
temperature of T =20.00°C.
Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of temperature on resistance (Figure 9.17). One of the most common
thermometersisbasedonthethermistor,asemiconductorcrystalwithastrongtemperaturedependence,theresistanceof
whichismeasuredtoobtainitstemperature.Thedeviceissmall,sothatitquicklycomesintothermalequilibriumwiththe
part of a person it touches.
Figure 9.17 These familiar thermometers are based on the automated measurement of a
thermistor’s temperature-dependent resistance.
Example 9.6
Calculating Resistance
Althoughcautionmustbeusedinapplying ρ= ρ (1+αΔT) and R=R (1+αΔT) fortemperaturechanges
0 0
greater than 100°C, for tungsten, the equations work reasonably well for very large temperature changes. A
tungsten filament at 20°C has a resistance of 0.350Ω. What would the resistance be if the temperature is
increased to 2850°C?
Strategy
Thisisastraightforwardapplicationof R=R (1+αΔT),sincetheoriginalresistanceofthefilamentisgiven
0
as R =0.350Ω and the temperature change is ΔT =2830°C.
0
Solution
The resistance of the hotter filamentRis obtained by entering known values into the above equation:
⎡ ⎛ −3⎞ ⎤
R=R (1+αΔT)= (0.350Ω) 1+ 4.5×10 (2830°C) =4.8Ω.
0 ⎣ ⎝ °C ⎠ ⎦

404 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
Significance
Noticethattheresistancechangesbymorethanafactorof10asthefilamentwarmstothehightemperatureand
thecurrentthroughthefilamentdependsontheresistanceofthefilamentandthevoltageapplied.Ifthefilament
isusedinanincandescentlightbulb,theinitialcurrentthroughthefilamentwhenthebulbisfirstenergizedwill
be higher than the current after the filament reaches the operating temperature.
9.6 CheckYourUnderstandingAstraingaugeisanelectricaldevicetomeasurestrain,asshownbelow.It
consists of a flexible, insulating backing that supports a conduction foil pattern. The resistance of the foil
changesasthebackingisstretched.Howdoesthestraingaugeresistancechange?Isthestraingaugeaffected
by temperature changes?
Example 9.7
The Resistance of Coaxial Cable
Longcablescansometimesactlikeantennas,pickingupelectronicnoise,whicharesignalsfromotherequipment
and appliances. Coaxial cables are used for many applications that require this noise to be eliminated. For
example,theycanbefoundinthehomeincableTVconnectionsorotheraudiovisualconnections.Coaxialcables
consist of an inner conductor of radius r surrounded by a second, outer concentric conductor with radius r
i o
(Figure 9.18). The space between the two is normally filled with an insulator such as polyethylene plastic. A
smallamountofradialleakagecurrentoccursbetweenthetwoconductors.Determinetheresistanceofacoaxial
cable of lengthL.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 405
Figure 9.18 Coaxial cables consist of two concentric conductors separated
by insulation. They are often used in cable TV or other audiovisual
connections.
Strategy
L
Wecannotusetheequation R= ρ directly.Instead,welookatconcentriccylindricalshells,withthicknessdr,
A
and integrate.
Solution
We first find an expression fordRand then integrate from r to r ,
i o
ρ ρ
dR = dr = dr,
A 2πrL
ro ro ro
ρ ρ ρ r
R = ∫ r dR=∫ r 2πrL dr = 2πL ∫ r 1 r dr = 2πL ln r o i .
i i i
Significance
Theresistanceofacoaxialcabledependsonitslength,theinnerandouterradii,andtheresistivityofthematerial
separating the two conductors. Since this resistance is not infinite, a small leakage current occurs between the
twoconductors.Thisleakagecurrentleadstotheattenuation(orweakening)ofthesignalbeingsentthroughthe
cable.
9.7 CheckYourUnderstandingTheresistancebetweenthetwoconductorsofacoaxialcabledependson
the resistivity of the material separating the two conductors, the length of the cable and the inner and outer
radius of the two conductor. If you are designing a coaxial cable, how does the resistance between the two
conductors depend on these variables?
Viewthissimulation (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21batteryresist) toseehowthevoltageappliedand
theresistanceofthematerialthecurrentflowsthroughaffectsthecurrentthroughthematerial.Youcanvisualize
the collisions of the electrons and the atoms of the material effect the temperature of the material.

406 Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance
9.4 | Ohm's Law
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe Ohm’s law
• Recognize when Ohm’s law applies and when it does not
Wehavebeendiscussingthreeelectricalpropertiessofarinthischapter:current,voltage,andresistance.Itturnsoutthat
many materials exhibit a simple relationship among the values for these properties, known as Ohm’s law. Many other
materialsdonotshowthisrelationship,sodespitebeingcalledOhm’slaw,itisnotconsideredalawofnature,likeNewton’s
laws or the laws of thermodynamics. But it is very useful for calculations involving materials that do obey Ohm’s law.
Description of Ohm’s Law
ThecurrentthatflowsthroughmostsubstancesisdirectlyproportionaltothevoltageVappliedtoit.TheGermanphysicist
Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854) was the first to demonstrate experimentally that the current in a metal wire is directly
proportional to the voltage applied:
I∝V.
ThisimportantrelationshipisthebasisforOhm’slaw.Itcanbeviewedasacause-and-effectrelationship,withvoltagethe
causeandcurrenttheeffect.Thisisanempiricallaw,whichistosaythatitisanexperimentallyobservedphenomenon,like
friction.Suchalinearrelationshipdoesn’talwaysoccur.Anymaterial,component,ordevicethatobeysOhm’slaw,where
thecurrentthroughthedeviceisproportionaltothevoltageapplied,isknownasanohmicmaterialorohmiccomponent.
Any material or component that does not obey Ohm’s law is known as anonohmicmaterial or nonohmic component.
Ohm’s Experiment
Inapaperpublishedin1827,GeorgOhmdescribedanexperimentinwhichhemeasuredvoltageacrossandcurrentthrough
varioussimpleelectricalcircuitscontainingvariouslengthsofwire.AsimilarexperimentisshowninFigure 9.19.This
experiment is used to observe the current through a resistor that results from an applied voltage. In this simple circuit, a
resistor is connected in series with a battery. The voltage is measured with a voltmeter, which must be placed across the
resistor(inparallelwiththeresistor).Thecurrentismeasuredwithanammeter,whichmustbeinlinewiththeresistor(in
series with the resistor).
Figure 9.19 The experimental set-up used to determine if a resistor is
an ohmic or nonohmic device. (a) When the battery is attached, the
current flows in the clockwise direction and the voltmeter and ammeter
have positive readings. (b) When the leads of the battery are switched, the
current flows in the counterclockwise direction and the voltmeter and
ammeter have negative readings.
InthisupdatedversionofOhm’soriginalexperiment,severalmeasurementsofthecurrentweremadeforseveraldifferent
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 9 | Current and Resistance 407
voltages. When the battery was hooked up as in Figure 9.19(a), the current flowed in the clockwise direction and the
readingsofthevoltmeterandammeterwerepositive.Doesthebehaviorofthecurrentchangeifthecurrentflowedinthe
oppositedirection?Togetthecurrenttoflowintheoppositedirection,theleadsofthebatterycanbeswitched.Whenthe
leadsofthebatterywereswitched,thereadingsofthevoltmeterandammeterreadingswerenegativebecausethecurrent
flowedintheoppositedirection,inthiscase,counterclockwise.ResultsofasimilarexperimentareshowninFigure9.20.
Figure 9.20 A resistor is placed in a circuit with a battery. The voltage applied varies from −10.00 V to
+10.00 V, increased by 1.00-V increments. A plot shows values of the voltage versus the current typical of
what a casual experimenter might find.
In this experiment, the voltage applied across the resistor varies from −10.00 to +10.00 V, by increments of 1.00 V. The
currentthroughtheresistorandthevoltageacrosstheresistoraremeasured.Aplotismadeofthevoltageversusthecurrent,
andtheresultisapproximatelylinear.Theslopeofthelineistheresistance,orthevoltagedividedbythecurrent.Thisresult
is known asOhm’s law:
V =IR, (9.11)
whereVisthevoltagemeasuredinvoltsacrosstheobjectinquestion,Iisthecurrentmeasuredthroughtheobjectinamps,
andRistheresistanceinunitsofohms.Asstatedpreviously,anydevicethatshowsalinearrelationshipbetweenthevoltage
and the current is known as an ohmic device. A resistor is therefore an ohmic device.
Example 9.8
Measuring Resistance
Acarbonresistoratroomtemperature (20°C) isattachedtoa9.00-Vbatteryandthecurrentmeasuredthrough
theresistoris3.00mA.(a)Whatistheresistanceoftheresistormeasuredinohms?(b)Ifthetemperatureofthe
resistor is increased to 60°C by heating the resistor, what is the current through the resistor?
Strategy
(a)TheresistancecanbefoundusingOhm’slaw.Ohm’slawstatesthat V =IR,sotheresistancecanbefound
using R=V/I.