# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 491-496
############################################################

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 481
• Whenmultiplevoltagesourcesareinparallel,theirinternalresistancescombinetoanequivalentresistancethatis
less than the individual resistance and provides a higher current than a single cell.
• Solar cells can be wired in series or parallel to provide increased voltage or current, respectively.
10.4Electrical Measuring Instruments
• Voltmeters measure voltage, and ammeters measure current. Analog meters are based on the combination of a
resistorandagalvanometer,adevicethatgivesananalogreadingofcurrentorvoltage.Digitalmetersarebasedon
analog-to-digital converters and provide a discrete or digital measurement of the current or voltage.
• Avoltmeterisplacedinparallelwiththevoltagesourcetoreceivefullvoltageandmusthavealargeresistanceto
limit its effect on the circuit.
• Anammeterisplacedinseriestogetthefullcurrentflowingthroughabranchandmusthaveasmallresistanceto
limit its effect on the circuit.
• Standard voltmeters and ammeters alter the circuit they are connected to and are thus limited in accuracy.
• Ohmmeters are used to measure resistance. The component in which the resistance is to be measured should be
isolated (removed) from the circuit.
10.5RC Circuits
• AnRCcircuit is one that has both a resistor and a capacitor.
• The time constant τ for anRCcircuit is τ=RC.
• Whenaninitiallyuncharged (q=0 at t=0) capacitorinserieswitharesistorischargedbyadcvoltagesource,
the capacitor asymptotically approaches the maximum charge.
• As the charge on the capacitor increases, the current exponentially decreases from the initial current: I =ε/R.
0
• IfacapacitorwithaninitialchargeQisdischargedthrougharesistorstartingat t=0,thenitschargedecreases
exponentially.Thecurrentflowsintheoppositedirection,comparedtowhenitcharges,andthemagnitudeofthe
charge decreases with time.
10.6Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
• The two types of electric hazards are thermal (excessive power) and shock (current through a person). Electrical
safety systems and devices are employed to prevent thermal and shock hazards.
• Shock severity is determined by current, path, duration, and ac frequency.
• Circuit breakers and fuses interrupt excessive currents to prevent thermal hazards.
• Thethree-wiresystemguardsagainstthermalandshockhazards,utilizinglive/hot,neutral,andgroundwires,and
grounding the neutral wire and case of the appliance.
• A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) prevents shock by detecting the loss of current to unintentional paths.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
3. Show that the power dissipated by the load resistor is
10.1Electromotive Force maximumwhentheresistanceoftheloadresistorisequal
to the internal resistance of the battery.
1. What effect will the internal resistance of a
rechargeable battery have on the energy being used to
recharge the battery?
10.2Resistors in Series and Parallel
2. A battery with an internal resistance of r and an emf 4. A voltage occurs across an open switch. What is the
of 10.00 V is connected to a load resistor R=r. As the power dissipated by the open switch?
battery ages, the internal resistance triples. How much is
the current through the load resistor reduced? 5. Theseverityofashockdependsonthemagnitudeofthe
currentthroughyourbody.Wouldyouprefertobeinseries
orinparallelwitharesistance,suchastheheatingelement

482 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
of a toaster, if you were shocked by it? Explain. starter system requires 24 V, while normal operation of
the truck’sother electrical components utilizes 12V.How
6. Supposeyouaredoingaphysicslabthatasksyoutoput couldthefourbatteriesbeconnectedtoproduce24V?To
a resistor into a circuit, but all the resistors supplied have produce 12 V? Why is 24 V better than 12 V for starting
a larger resistance than the requested value. How would the truck’s engine (a very heavy load)?
you connect the available resistances to attempt to get the
smaller value asked for?
10.4Electrical Measuring Instruments
7. Some light bulbs have three power settings (not 13. Whatwouldhappenifyouplacedavoltmeterinseries
including zero), obtained from multiple filaments that are with a component to be tested?
individually switched and wired in parallel. What is the
minimum number of filaments needed for three power
14. What is the basic operation of an ohmmeter as it
settings?
measures a resistor?
15. Why should you not connect an ammeter directly
10.3Kirchhoff's Rules
across a voltage source as shown below?
8. Can all of the currents going into the junction shown
below be positive? Explain.
9. Considerthecircuitshownbelow.Doestheanalysisof
thecircuitrequireKirchhoff’smethod,orcanitberedrawn
tosimplifythecircuit?Ifitisacircuitofseriesandparallel
connections, what is the equivalent resistance? 10.5RC Circuits
16. Abattery,switch,capacitor,andlampareconnectedin
series.Describewhathappenstothelampwhentheswitch
is closed.
17. WhenmakinganECGmeasurement,itisimportantto
measure voltage variations over small time intervals. The
time is limited bythe RC constant ofthe circuit—it is not
possible to measure time variations shorter than RC. How
would you manipulate R and C in the circuit to allow the
necessary measurements?
10. Do batteries in a circuit always supply power to a
10.6Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
circuit, or can they absorb power in a circuit? Give an
example. 18. Why isn’t a short circuit necessarily a shock hazard?
11. What are the advantages and disadvantages of 19. Weareoftenadvisedtonotflickelectricswitcheswith
connecting batteries in series? In parallel? wethands,dryyourhandfirst.Wearealsoadvisedtonever
throw water on an electric fire. Why?
12. Semi-tractortrucksusefourlarge12-Vbatteries.The
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 483
PROBLEMS
powerisdissipatedinsidethebattery?(c)Atwhatrate(in
10.1Electromotive Force °C/min)willitstemperatureincreaseifitsmassis20.0kg
20. A car battery with a 12-V emf and an internal andithasaspecificheatof 0.300kcal/kg ·°C,assuming
resistance of 0.050Ω is being charged with a current of no heat escapes?
60A.Notethatinthisprocess,thebatteryisbeingcharged.
(a) What is the potential difference across its terminals?
(b) At what rate is thermal energy being dissipated in the 10.2Resistors in Series and Parallel
battery?(c)Atwhatrateiselectricenergybeingconverted
into chemical energy? 26. (a) What is the resistance of a 1.00×102-Ω, a
2.50-kΩ,anda 4.00-kΩ resistorconnectedinseries?(b)
21. The label on a battery-powered radio recommends In parallel?
the use of a rechargeable nickel-cadmium cell (nicads),
although it has a 1.25-V emf, whereas an alkaline cell 27. Whatarethelargestandsmallestresistancesyoucan
has a 1.58-V emf. The radio has a 3.20Ω resistance. obtainbyconnectinga 36.0-Ω,a 50.0-Ω,anda 700-Ω
(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the radio and its battery. resistor together?
Now, calculate the power delivered to the radio (b) when
using a nicad cells, each having an internal resistance of
28. An 1800-W toaster, a 1400-W speaker, and a 75-W
0.0400Ω,and(c)whenusinganalkalinecell,havingan
lamp are plugged into the same outlet in a 15-A fuse and
internal resistance of 0.200Ω. (d) Does this difference
120-V circuit. (The three devices are in parallel when
seem significant, considering that the radio’s effective plugged into the same socket.) (a) What current is drawn
resistance is lowered when its volume is turned up? by each device? (b) Will this combination blow the 15-A
fuse?
22. An automobile starter motor has an equivalent
resistanceof 0.0500Ω andissuppliedbya12.0-Vbattery 29. Your car’s 30.0-W headlight and 2.40-kW starter are
with a 0.0100-Ω internal resistance. (a) What is the ordinarily connected in parallel in a 12.0-V system. What
power would one headlight and the starter consume if
current to the motor? (b) What voltage is applied to it?
connectedinseriestoa12.0-Vbattery?(Neglectanyother
(c)Whatpowerissuppliedtothemotor?(d)Repeatthese
resistanceinthecircuitandanychangeinresistanceinthe
calculationsforwhenthebatteryconnectionsarecorroded
two devices.)
andadd 0.0900Ω tothecircuit.(Significantproblemsare
caused by even small amounts of unwanted resistance in
low-voltage, high-current applications.) 30. (a)Givena48.0-Vbatteryand 24.0-Ω and 96.0-Ω
resistors, find the current and power for each when
connectedinseries.(b)Repeatwhentheresistancesarein
23. (a)Whatistheinternalresistanceofavoltagesource
parallel.
if its terminal potential drops by 2.00 V when the current
supplied increases by 5.00 A? (b) Can the emf of the
voltage source be found with the information supplied? 31. Referringtotheexamplecombiningseriesandparallel
circuits and Figure 10.16, calculate I in the following
3
24. A person with body resistance between his hands of two different ways: (a) from the known values of I and
10.0kΩ accidentally grasps the terminals of a 20.0-kV I ;(b)usingOhm’slawfor R .Inbothparts,explicitly
2 3
power supply. (Do NOT do this!) (a) Draw a circuit
show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving
diagram to represent the situation. (b) If the internal
Strategy: Series and Parallel Resistors.
resistance of the power supply is 2000Ω, what is the
currentthroughhisbody?(c)Whatisthepowerdissipated
32. ReferringtoFigure10.16,(a)Calculate P andnote
inhisbody?(d)Ifthepowersupplyistobemadesafeby 3
increasing its internal resistance, what should the internal how it compares with P found in the first two example
3
resistance be for the maximum current in this situation to
problemsinthismodule.(b)Findthetotalpowersupplied
be1.00mAorless?(e)Willthismodificationcompromise
by the source and compare it with the sum of the powers
the effectiveness of the power supply for driving low-
dissipated by the resistors.
resistance devices? Explain your reasoning.
33. Refer to Figure 10.17 and the discussion of lights
25. A 12.0-V emf automobile battery has a terminal
dimmingwhenaheavyappliancecomeson.(a)Giventhe
voltageof16.0Vwhenbeingchargedbyacurrentof10.0
voltage source is 120 V, the wire resistance is 0.800Ω,
A. (a) What is the battery’s internal resistance? (b) What

484 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
andthebulbisnominally75.0W,whatpowerwillthebulb
dissipateifatotalof15.0Apassesthroughthewireswhen
the motor comes on? Assume negligible change in bulb
resistance. (b) What power is consumed by the motor?
34. Showthatiftworesistors R and R arecombined
1 2
and one is much greater than the other (R ≫R ), (a)
1 2
their series resistance is very nearly equal to the greater
resistanceR and(b)theirparallelresistanceisverynearly
1
equal to smaller resistance R .
2
35. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal
voltage of the battery is V =18.00V. (a) Find the
equivalent resistance of the circuit. (b) Find the current
through each resistor. (c) Find the potential drop across
eachresistor.(d)Findthepowerdissipatedbyeachresistor.
(e) Find the power supplied by the battery.
38. Consider the circuit shown below. Find
V , I , andI .
1 2 3
10.3Kirchhoff's Rules
36. Considerthecircuitshownbelow.(a)Findthevoltage
across each resistor. (b)What is the power supplied to the
circuit and the power dissipated or consumed by the
circuit?
39. Consider the circuit shown below. Find
V , V , andR .
1 2 4
40. Consider the circuit shown below. Find
37. Consider the circuits shown below. (a) What is the I , I , andI .
1 2 3
current through each resistor in part (a)? (b) What is the
current through each resistor in part (b)? (c) What is the
powerdissipatedorconsumedbyeachcircuit?(d)Whatis
the power supplied to each circuit?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 485
ofRandV.
45. A child’s electronic toy is supplied by three 1.58-V
alkaline cells having internal resistances of 0.0200Ω in
series with a 1.53-V carbon-zinc dry cell having a
0.100-Ω internal resistance. The load resistance is
10.0Ω. (a) Draw a circuit diagram of the toy and its
batteries.(b)Whatcurrentflows?(c)Howmuchpoweris
suppliedtotheload?(d)Whatistheinternalresistanceof
thedrycellifitgoesbad,resultinginonly0.500Wbeing
supplied to the load?
41. Consider the circuit shown below. (a) Find
I , I , I , I , andI . (b)Findthepowersuppliedbythe 46. ApplythejunctionruletoJunctionbshownbelow.Is
1 2 3 4 5
any new information gained by applying the junction rule
voltage sources. (c) Find the power dissipated by the
ate?
resistors.
42. Considerthecircuitshownbelow.Writethethreeloop
equations for the loops shown.
47. ApplytheloopruletoLoopafedcbainthepreceding
problem.
10.4Electrical Measuring Instruments
43. Considerthecircuitshownbelow.Writeequationsfor 48. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a
the three currents in terms ofRandV. 1.585-V alkaline cell having an internal resistance of
0.100Ω by placing a 1.00-kΩ voltmeter across its
terminals (see below). (a) What current flows? (b) Find
the terminal voltage. (c) To see how close the measured
terminal voltage is to the emf, calculate their ratio.
44. Considerthecircuitshownintheprecedingproblem.
Write equations for the power supplied by the voltage
sources and the power dissipated by the resistors in terms