# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 562-568
############################################################

550 11 • Chapter Review
Additional Problems
78 . A marble is rolling across the floor at a speed of in 0.01 s. The proton follows a
7.0 m/s when it starts up a plane inclined at circular path. If the radius of the cyclotron is 0.5
to the horizontal. (a) How far along the plane km, (a) What is the angular momentum of the
does the marble travel before coming to a rest? proton about the center at its maximum speed?
(b) How much time elapses while the marble (b) What is the torque on the proton about the
moves up the plane? center as it accelerates to maximum speed?
79 . Repeat the preceding problem replacing the 85 . (a) What is the angular momentum of the Moon
marble with a hollow sphere. Explain the new in its orbit around Earth? (b) How does this
results. angular momentum compare with the angular
momentum of the Moon on its axis? Remember
80 . The mass of a hoop of radius 1.0 m is 6.0 kg. It
that the Moon keeps one side toward Earth at all
rolls across a horizontal surface with a speed of
times.
10.0 m/s. (a) How much work is required to stop
the hoop? (b) If the hoop starts up a surface at 86 . A DVD is rotating at 500 rpm. What is the
to the horizontal with a speed of 10.0 m/s, angular momentum of the DVD if has a radius of
how far along the incline will it travel before 6.0 cm and mass 20.0 g?
stopping and rolling back down?
87 . A potter’s disk spins from rest up to 10 rev/s in
81 . Repeat the preceding problem for a hollow 15 s. The disk has a mass 3.0 kg and radius 30.0
sphere of the same radius and mass and initial cm. What is the angular momentum of the disk
speed. Explain the differences in the results. at ?
82 . A particle has mass 0.5 kg and is traveling along 88 . Suppose you start an antique car by exerting a
the line at 2.0 m/s in the positive force of 300 N on its crank for 0.250 s. What is
y-direction. What is the particle’s angular the angular momentum given to the engine if the
momentum about the origin? handle of the crank is 0.300 m from the pivot
and the force is exerted to create maximum
83 . A 4.0-kg particle moves in a circle of radius 2.0
torque the entire time?
m. The angular momentum of the particle varies
in time according to (a) What is the 89 . A solid cylinder of mass 2.0 kg and radius 20 cm
torque on the particle about the center of the is rotating counterclockwise around a vertical
circle at ? (b) What is the angular axis through its center at 600 rev/min. A second
velocity of the particle at ? solid cylinder of the same mass and radius is
rotating clockwise around the same vertical axis
84 . A proton is accelerated in a cyclotron to
Access for free at openstax.org

11 • Chapter Review 551
at 900 rev/min. If the cylinders couple so that torque on the structure.
they rotate about the same vertical axis, what is
92 . A thin meter stick of mass 150 g rotates around
the angular velocity of the combination?
an axis perpendicular to the stick’s long axis at
90 . A boy stands at the center of a platform that is an angular velocity of 240 rev/min. What is the
rotating without friction at 1.0 rev/s. The boy angular momentum of the stick if the rotation
holds weights as far from his body as possible. axis (a) passes through the center of the stick?
At this position the total moment of inertia of the (b) Passes through one end of the stick?
boy, platform, and weights is The
93 . A satellite in the shape of a sphere of mass
boy draws the weights in close to his body,
20,000 kg and radius 5.0 m is spinning about an
thereby decreasing the total moment of inertia
axis through its center of mass. It has a rotation
to (a) What is the final angular
rate of 8.0 rev/s. Two antennas deploy in the
velocity of the platform? (b) By how much does
plane of rotation extending from the center of
the rotational kinetic energy increase?
mass of the satellite. Each antenna can be
91 . Eight children, each of mass 40 kg, climb on a approximated as a rod has mass 200.0 kg and
small merry-go-round. They position themselves length 7.0 m. What is the new rotation rate of
evenly on the outer edge and join hands. The the satellite?
merry-go-round has a radius of 4.0 m and a
94 . A top has moment of inertia
moment of inertia . After the
and radius 4.0 cm from the center of mass to the
merry-go-round is given an angular velocity of
pivot point. If it spins at 20.0 rev/s and is
6.0 rev/min, the children walk inward and stop
precessing, how many revolutions does it
when they are 0.75 m from the axis of rotation.
precess in 10.0 s?
What is the new angular velocity of the merry-
go-round? Assume there is negligible frictional
Challenge Problems
95 . The truck shown below is initially at rest with solid as shown below. When the rod has an angular
cylindrical roll of paper sitting on its bed. If the truck velocity of 6.0 rad/s, the string makes an angle
moves forward with a uniform acceleration a, what of with respect to the vertical. (a) If the
distance s does it move before the paper rolls off its angular velocity is increased to 10.0 rad/s, what
back end? (Hint: If the roll accelerates forward with is the new angle of the string? (b) Calculate the
, then is accelerates backward relative to the truck initial and final angular momenta of the ball. (c)
with an acceleration . Also, .) Can the rod spin fast enough so that the ball is
horizontal?
96 . A bowling ball of radius 8.5 cm is tossed onto a
bowling lane with speed 9.0 m/s. The direction
of the toss is to the left, as viewed by the
observer, so the bowling ball starts to rotate
counterclockwise when in contact with the floor.
The coefficient of kinetic friction on the lane is
0.3. (a) What is the time required for the ball to
come to the point where it is not slipping? What
is the distance d to the point where the ball is
rolling without slipping? 98 . A bug flying horizontally at 1.0 m/s collides and
sticks to the end of a uniform stick hanging
97 . A small ball of mass 0.50 kg is attached by a
vertically. After the impact, the stick swings out
massless string to a vertical rod that is spinning

552 11 • Chapter Review
to a maximum angle of from the vertical 10 times that of the bug, calculate the length of
before rotating back. If the mass of the stick is the stick.
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 12
Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.1 Two stilt walkers in standing position. All forces acting on each stilt walker balance out; neither changes its translational
motion. In addition, all torques acting on each person balance out, and thus neither of them changes its rotational motion. The result is
static equilibrium. (credit: modification of work by Stuart Redler)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus
12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
INTRODUCTION In earlier chapters, you learned about forces and Newton’s laws for translational motion. You then
studied torques and the rotational motion of a body about a fixed axis of rotation. You also learned that static
equilibrium means no motion at all and that dynamic equilibrium means motion without acceleration.
In this chapter, we combine the conditions for static translational equilibrium and static rotational equilibrium to
describe situations typical for any kind of construction. What type of cable will support a suspension bridge? What
type of foundation will support an office building? Will this prosthetic arm function correctly? These are examples of
questions that contemporary engineers must be able to answer.
The elastic properties of materials are especially important in engineering applications, including bioengineering.
For example, materials that can stretch or compress and then return to their original form or position make good
shock absorbers. In this chapter, you will learn about some applications that combine equilibrium with elasticity to
construct real structures that last.

554 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the physical conditions of static equilibrium.
• Draw a free-body diagram for a rigid body acted on by forces.
• Explain how the conditions for equilibrium allow us to solve statics problems.
We say that a rigid body is in equilibrium when both its linear and angular acceleration are zero relative to an inertial
frame of reference. This means that a body in equilibrium can be moving, but if so, its linear and angular velocities
must be constant. We say that a rigid body is in static equilibrium when it is at rest in our selected frame of
reference. Notice that the distinction between the state of rest and a state of uniform motion is artificial—that is, an
object may be at rest in our selected frame of reference, yet to an observer moving at constant velocity relative to
our frame, the same object appears to be in uniform motion with constant velocity. Because the motion is relative,
what is in static equilibrium to us is in dynamic equilibrium to the moving observer, and vice versa. Since the laws of
physics are identical for all inertial reference frames, in an inertial frame of reference, there is no distinction
between static equilibrium and equilibrium.
According to Newton’s second law of motion, the linear acceleration of a rigid body is caused by a net force acting on
it, or
12.1
Here, the sum is of all external forces acting on the body, where m is its mass and is the linear acceleration of
its center of mass (a concept we discussed in Linear Momentum and Collisions on linear momentum and collisions).
In equilibrium, the linear acceleration is zero. If we set the acceleration to zero in Equation 12.1, we obtain the
following equation:
FIRST EQUILIBRIUM CONDITION
The first equilibrium condition for the static equilibrium of a rigid body expresses translational equilibrium:
12.2
The first equilibrium condition, Equation 12.2, is the equilibrium condition for forces, which we encountered when
studying applications of Newton’s laws.
This vector equation is equivalent to the following three scalar equations for the components of the net force:
12.3
Analogously to Equation 12.1, we can state that the rotational acceleration of a rigid body about a fixed axis of
rotation is caused by the net torque acting on the body, or
12.4
Here is the rotational inertia of the body in rotation about this axis and the summation is over all torques of
external forces in Equation 12.2. In equilibrium, the rotational acceleration is zero. By setting to zero the right-hand
side of Equation 12.4, we obtain the second equilibrium condition:
SECOND EQUILIBRIUM CONDITION
The second equilibrium condition for the static equilibrium of a rigid body expresses rotational equilibrium:
Access for free at openstax.org

12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 555
12.5
The second equilibrium condition, Equation 12.5, is the equilibrium condition for torques that we encountered when
we studied rotational dynamics. It is worth noting that this equation for equilibrium is generally valid for rotational
equilibrium about any axis of rotation (fixed or otherwise). Again, this vector equation is equivalent to three scalar
equations for the vector components of the net torque:
12.6
The second equilibrium condition means that in equilibrium, there is no net external torque to cause rotation about
any axis.
The first and second equilibrium conditions are stated in a particular reference frame. The first condition involves
only forces and is therefore independent of the origin of the reference frame. However, the second condition
involves torque, which is defined as a cross product, where the position vector with respect to
the axis of rotation of the point where the force is applied enters the equation. Therefore, torque depends on the
location of the axis in the reference frame. However, when rotational and translational equilibrium conditions hold
simultaneously in one frame of reference, then they also hold in any other inertial frame of reference, so that the net
torque about any axis of rotation is still zero. The explanation for this is fairly straightforward.
Suppose vector is the position of the origin of a new inertial frame of reference in the old inertial frame of
reference S. From our study of relative motion, we know that in the new frame of reference the position vector
of the point where the force is applied is related to via the equation
Now, we can sum all torques of all external forces in a new reference frame,
In the final step in this chain of reasoning, we used the fact that in equilibrium in the old frame of reference, S, the
first term vanishes because of Equation 12.5 and the second term vanishes because of Equation 12.2. Hence, we
see that the net torque in any inertial frame of reference is zero, provided that both conditions for equilibrium
hold in an inertial frame of reference S.
The practical implication of this is that when applying equilibrium conditions for a rigid body, we are free to choose
any point as the origin of the reference frame. Our choice of reference frame is dictated by the physical specifics of
the problem we are solving. In one frame of reference, the mathematical form of the equilibrium conditions may be
quite complicated, whereas in another frame, the same conditions may have a simpler mathematical form that is
easy to solve. The origin of a selected frame of reference is called the pivot point.
In the most general case, equilibrium conditions are expressed by the six scalar equations (Equation 12.3 and
Equation 12.6). For planar equilibrium problems with rotation about a fixed axis, which we consider in this chapter,
we can reduce the number of equations to three. The standard procedure is to adopt a frame of reference where the
z-axis is the axis of rotation. With this choice of axis, the net torque has only a z-component, all forces that have
non-zero torques lie in the xy-plane, and therefore contributions to the net torque come from only the x- and
y-components of external forces. Thus, for planar problems with the axis of rotation perpendicular to the xy-plane,
we have the following three equilibrium conditions for forces and torques:
12.7
12.8
12.9
where the summation is over all N external forces acting on the body and over their torques. In Equation 12.9, we