# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 529-536
############################################################

11.1 • Rolling Motion 517
FIGURE 11.3 (a) A wheel is pulled across a horizontal surface by a force . The force of static friction is large enough to
keep it from slipping. (b) The linear velocity and acceleration vectors of the center of mass and the relevant expressions for . Point P
is at rest relative to the surface. (c) Relative to the center of mass (CM) frame, point P has linear velocity .
From Figure 11.3(a), we see the force vectors involved in preventing the wheel from slipping. In (b), point P that
touches the surface is at rest relative to the surface. Relative to the center of mass, point P has velocity ,
where R is the radius of the wheel and is the wheel’s angular velocity about its axis. Since the wheel is rolling, the
velocity of P with respect to the surface is its velocity with respect to the center of mass plus the velocity of the
center of mass with respect to the surface:
Since the velocity of P relative to the surface is zero, , this says that
11.1
Thus, the velocity of the wheel’s center of mass is its radius times the angular velocity about its axis. We show the
correspondence of the linear variable on the left side of the equation with the angular variable on the right side of
the equation. This is done below for the linear acceleration.
If we differentiate Equation 11.1 on the left side of the equation, we obtain an expression for the linear acceleration
of the center of mass. On the right side of the equation, R is a constant and since we have
11.2
Furthermore, we can find the distance the wheel travels in terms of angular variables by referring to Figure 11.4. As
the wheel rolls from point A to point B, its outer surface maps onto the ground by exactly the distance travelled,
which is We see from Figure 11.4 that the length of the outer surface that maps onto the ground is the arc
length ​ . Equating the two distances, we obtain
11.3
FIGURE 11.4 As the wheel rolls on the surface, the arc length from A to B maps onto the surface, corresponding to the distance

518 11 • Angular Momentum
that the center of mass has moved.
EXAMPLE 11.1
Rolling Down an Inclined Plane
A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane without slipping, starting from rest. It has mass m and radius r. (a) What
is its acceleration? (b) What condition must the coefficient of static friction satisfy so the cylinder does not slip?
Strategy
Draw a sketch and free-body diagram, and choose a coordinate system. We put x in the direction down the plane
and y upward perpendicular to the plane. Identify the forces involved. These are the normal force, the force of
gravity, and the force due to friction. Write down Newton’s laws in the x- and y-directions, and Newton’s law for
rotation, and then solve for the acceleration and force due to friction.
Solution
a. The free-body diagram and sketch are shown in Figure 11.5, including the normal force, components of the
weight, and the static friction force. There is barely enough friction to keep the cylinder rolling without
slipping. Since there is no slipping, the magnitude of the friction force is less than or equal to . Writing
down Newton’s laws in the x- and y-directions, we have
FIGURE 11.5 A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane without slipping from rest. The coordinate system has x in the direction
down the inclined plane and y perpendicular to the plane. The free-body diagram is shown with the normal force, the static friction
force, and the components of the weight . Friction makes the cylinder roll down the plane rather than slip.
Substituting in from the free-body diagram,
we can then solve for the linear acceleration of the center of mass from these equations:
However, it is useful to express the linear acceleration in terms of the moment of inertia. For this, we write
down Newton’s second law for rotation,
The torques are calculated about the axis through the center of mass of the cylinder. The only nonzero torque
is provided by the friction force. We have
Access for free at openstax.org

11.1 • Rolling Motion 519
Finally, the linear acceleration is related to the angular acceleration by
These equations can be used to solve for in terms of the moment of inertia, where we have
dropped the x-subscript. We rewrite in terms of the vertical component of gravity and the friction force,
and make the following substitutions.
From this we obtain
Note that this result is independent of the coefficient of static friction, .
Since we have a solid cylinder, from Figure 10.20, we have and
Therefore, we have
b. Because slipping does not occur, . Solving for the friction force,
Substituting this expression into the condition for no slipping, and noting that , we have
or
For the solid cylinder, this becomes
Significance
a. The linear acceleration is linearly proportional to Thus, the greater the angle of the incline, the greater
the linear acceleration, as would be expected. The angular acceleration, however, is linearly proportional to
and inversely proportional to the radius of the cylinder. Thus, the larger the radius, the smaller the
angular acceleration.
b. For no slipping to occur, the coefficient of static friction must be greater than or equal to . Thus, the
greater the angle of incline, the greater the coefficient of static friction must be to prevent the cylinder from
slipping.

520 11 • Angular Momentum
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.1
A hollow cylinder is on an incline at an angle of The coefficient of static friction on the surface is . (a)
Does the cylinder roll without slipping? (b) Will a solid cylinder roll without slipping?
It is worthwhile to repeat the equation derived in this example for the acceleration of an object rolling without
slipping:
11.4
This is a very useful equation for solving problems involving rolling without slipping. Note that the acceleration is
less than that of an object sliding down a frictionless plane with no rotation. The acceleration will also be different
for two rotating objects with different rotational inertias.
Rolling Motion with Slipping
In the case of rolling motion with slipping, we must use the coefficient of kinetic friction, which gives rise to the
kinetic friction force since static friction is not present. The situation is shown in Figure 11.6. In the case of slipping,
, because point P on the wheel is not at rest on the surface, and . Thus,
.
FIGURE 11.6 (a) Kinetic friction arises between the wheel and the surface because the wheel is slipping. (b) The simple relationships
between the linear and angular variables are no longer valid.
EXAMPLE 11.2
Rolling Down an Inclined Plane with Slipping
A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane from rest and undergoes slipping (Figure 11.7). It has mass m and
radius r. (a) What is its linear acceleration? (b) What is its angular acceleration about an axis through the center of
mass?
Strategy
Draw a sketch and free-body diagram showing the forces involved. The free-body diagram is similar to the no-
slipping case except for the friction force, which is kinetic instead of static. Use Newton’s second law to solve for the
acceleration in the x-direction. Use Newton’s second law of rotation to solve for the angular acceleration.
Access for free at openstax.org

11.1 • Rolling Motion 521
Solution
FIGURE 11.7 A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane from rest and undergoes slipping. The coordinate system has x in the direction
down the inclined plane and y upward perpendicular to the plane. The free-body diagram shows the normal force, kinetic friction force, and
the components of the weight
The sum of the forces in the y-direction is zero, so the friction force is now
Newton’s second law in the x-direction becomes
or
The friction force provides the only torque about the axis through the center of mass, so Newton’s second law of
rotation becomes
Solving for , we have
Significance
We write the linear and angular accelerations in terms of the coefficient of kinetic friction. The linear acceleration is
the same as that found for an object sliding down an inclined plane with kinetic friction. The angular acceleration
about the axis of rotation is linearly proportional to the normal force, which depends on the cosine of the angle of
inclination. As , this force goes to zero, and, thus, the angular acceleration goes to zero.
Conservation of Mechanical Energy in Rolling Motion
In the preceding chapter, we introduced rotational kinetic energy. Any rolling object carries rotational kinetic energy,
as well as translational kinetic energy and potential energy if the system requires. Including the gravitational
potential energy, the total mechanical energy of an object rolling is
In the absence of any nonconservative forces that would take energy out of the system in the form of heat, the total
energy of a rolling object without slipping is conserved and is constant throughout the motion. Examples where
energy is not conserved are a rolling object that is slipping, production of heat as a result of kinetic friction, and a
rolling object encountering air resistance.
You may ask why a rolling object that is not slipping conserves energy, since the static friction force is

522 11 • Angular Momentum
nonconservative. The answer can be found by referring back to Figure 11.3. Point P in contact with the surface is at
rest with respect to the surface. Therefore, its infinitesimal displacement with respect to the surface is zero, and
the incremental work done by the static friction force is zero. We can apply energy conservation to our study of
rolling motion to bring out some interesting results.
EXAMPLE 11.3
Curiosity Rover
The Curiosity rover, shown in Figure 11.8, was deployed on Mars on August 6, 2012. The wheels of the rover have a
radius of 25 cm. Suppose astronauts arrive on Mars in the year 2050 and find the now-inoperative Curiosity on the
side of a basin. While they are dismantling the rover, an astronaut accidentally loses a grip on one of the wheels,
which rolls without slipping down into the bottom of the basin 25 meters below. If the wheel has a mass of 5 kg,
what is its velocity at the bottom of the basin?
FIGURE 11.8 The NASA Mars Science Laboratory rover Curiosity during testing on June 3, 2011. The location is inside the Spacecraft
Assembly Facility at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. (credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech)
Strategy
We use mechanical energy conservation to analyze the problem. At the top of the hill, the wheel is at rest and has
only potential energy. At the bottom of the basin, the wheel has rotational and translational kinetic energy, which
must be equal to the initial potential energy by energy conservation. Since the wheel is rolling without slipping, we
use the relation to relate the translational variables to the rotational variables in the energy conservation
equation. We then solve for the velocity. From Figure 11.8, we see that a hollow cylinder is a good approximation for
the wheel, so we can use this moment of inertia to simplify the calculation.
Solution
Energy at the top of the basin equals energy at the bottom:
Access for free at openstax.org

11.2 • Angular Momentum 523
The known quantities are .
We rewrite the energy conservation equation eliminating by using We have
or
On Mars, the acceleration of gravity is which gives the magnitude of the velocity at the bottom of the
basin as
Significance
This is a fairly accurate result considering that Mars has very little atmosphere, and the loss of energy due to air
resistance would be minimal. The result also assumes that the terrain is smooth, such that the wheel wouldn’t
encounter rocks and bumps along the way.
Also, in this example, the kinetic energy, or energy of motion, is equally shared between linear and rotational
motion. If we look at the moments of inertia in Figure 10.20, we see that the hollow cylinder has the largest moment
of inertia for a given radius and mass. If the wheels of the rover were solid and approximated by solid cylinders, for
example, there would be more kinetic energy in linear motion than in rotational motion. This would give the wheel a
larger linear velocity than the hollow cylinder approximation. Thus, the solid cylinder would reach the bottom of the
basin faster than the hollow cylinder.
11.2 Angular Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the vector nature of angular momentum
• Find the total angular momentum and torque about a designated origin of a system of particles
• Calculate the angular momentum of a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis
• Calculate the torque on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis
• Use conservation of angular momentum in the analysis of objects that change their rotation rate
Why does Earth keep on spinning? What started it spinning to begin with? Why doesn’t Earth’s gravitational
attraction bring the Moon crashing in toward Earth? And how does an ice skater manage to spin faster and faster
simply by pulling her arms in? Why does she not have to exert a torque to spin faster?
Questions like these have answers based in angular momentum, the rotational analog to linear momentum. In this
chapter, we first define and then explore angular momentum from a variety of viewpoints. First, however, we
investigate the angular momentum of a single particle. This allows us to develop angular momentum for a system of
particles and for a rigid body that is cylindrically symmetric.
Angular Momentum of a Single Particle
Figure 11.9 shows a particle at a position with linear momentum with respect to the origin. Even if the
particle is not rotating about the origin, we can still define an angular momentum in terms of the position vector and
the linear momentum.
ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF A PARTICLE
The angular momentum of a particle is defined as the cross-product of and , and is perpendicular to the