# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 207-214
############################################################

Chapter 5 | Relativity 199
Solution
a. Identify the knowns (from part a):
Δt=3.33×10 −9 s;v=6.00×10 7 m/s;d =0.200m.
b. Identify the unknown: τ.
c. Express the answer as an equation:
Δt = γΔτ=
Δτ
1−v2/c2
Δτ = Δt 1−v2/c2.
d. Do the calculation:
2
⎛ 7 ⎞
Δτ = ⎛ 3.33×10 −9 s ⎞ 1− 6.00×10 m/s
⎝ ⎠ ⎝ 8 ⎠
3.00×10 m/s
−9
=3.26×10 s.
Significance
The time of travel is shorter in the electron frame of reference. Because the problem requires finding the time
interval measured in different reference frames for the same process, relativity is involved. If we had tried to
calculate the time in the electron rest frame by simply dividing the 0.200 m by the speed, the result would be
slightly incorrect because of the relativistic speed of the electron.
5.2 Check Your UnderstandingWhat is γ if v=0.650c?
The Twin Paradox
An intriguing consequence of time dilation is that a space traveler moving at a high velocity relative to Earth would age
lessthantheastronaut’searthboundtwin.Thisisoftenknownasthetwinparadox.Imaginetheastronautmovingatsucha
velocitythat γ =30.0, asinFigure5.7.Atripthattakes2.00yearsinherframewouldtake60.0yearsintheearthbound
twin’sframe.Supposetheastronauttravels1.00yeartoanotherstarsystem,brieflyexploresthearea,andthentravels1.00
year back. An astronaut who was 40 years old at the start of the trip would be would be 42 when the spaceship returns.
Everything on Earth, however, would have aged 60.0 years. The earthbound twin, if still alive, would be 100 years old.
ThesituationwouldseemdifferenttotheastronautinFigure5.7.Becausemotionisrelative,thespaceshipwouldseemto
bestationaryandEarthwouldappeartomove.(Thisisthesensationyouhavewhenflyinginajet.)Lookingoutthewindow
ofthespaceship,theastronautwouldseetimeslowdownonEarthbyafactorof γ =30.0. Seenfromthespaceship,the
earthbound sibling will have aged only 2/30, or 0.07, of a year, whereas the astronaut would have aged 2.00 years.

200 Chapter 5 | Relativity
Figure 5.7 The twin paradox consists of the conflicting
conclusions about which twin ages more as a result of a long
space journey at relativistic speed.
Theparadoxhereisthatthetwotwinscannotbothbecorrect. Aswithallparadoxes,conflicting conclusions comefrom
a false premise. In fact, the astronaut’s motion is significantly different from that of the earthbound twin. The astronaut
accelerates to a high velocity and then decelerates to view the star system. To return to Earth, she again accelerates and
decelerates.Thespacecraftisnotinasingleinertialframetowhichthetimedilationformulacanbedirectlyapplied.That
is,theastronauttwinchangesinertialreferences.Theearthboundtwindoesnotexperiencetheseaccelerationsandremains
inthesameinertialframe.Thus,thesituationisnotsymmetric,anditisincorrecttoclaimthattheastronautobservesthe
sameeffectsashertwin.Thelackofsymmetrybetweenthetwinswillbestillmoreevidentwhenweanalyzethejourney
later in this chapter in terms of the path the astronaut follows through four-dimensional space-time.
In1971,AmericanphysicistsJosephHafeleandRichardKeatingverifiedtimedilationatlowrelativevelocitiesbyflying
extremelyaccurateatomicclocksaroundtheworldoncommercialaircraft.Theymeasuredelapsedtimetoanaccuracyof
afewnanosecondsandcompareditwiththetimemeasuredbyclocksleftbehind.HafeleandKeating’sresultswerewithin
experimentaluncertaintiesofthepredictionsofrelativity.Bothspecialandgeneralrelativityhadtobetakenintoaccount,
because gravity and accelerations were involved as well as relative motion.
5.3 Check Your Understanding a. A particle travels at 1.90×10 8 m/s and lives 2.10×10 −8 s when at
rest relative to an observer. How long does the particle live as viewed in the laboratory?
b.SpacecraftAandBpassinoppositedirectionsatarelativespeedof 4.00×10 7 m/s. Aninternalclockin
spacecraftAcausesittoemitaradiosignalfor1.00s.ThecomputerinspacecraftBcorrectsforthebeginning
andendofthesignalhavingtraveleddifferentdistances,tocalculatethetimeintervalduringwhichshipAwas
emitting the signal. What is the time interval that the computer in spacecraftBcalculates?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 5 | Relativity 201
5.4 | Length Contraction
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how simultaneity and length contraction are related.
• Describe the relation between length contraction and time dilation and use it to derive the
length-contraction equation.
ThelengthofthetraincarinFigure 5.8isthesameforallthepassengers.Allofthemwouldagreeonthesimultaneous
locationofthetwoendsofthecarandobtainthesameresultforthedistancebetweenthem.Butsimultaneouseventsinone
inertialframeneednotbesimultaneousinanother.Ifthetraincouldtravelatrelativisticspeeds,anobserverontheground
wouldseethesimultaneouslocationsofthetwoendpointsofthecaratadifferentdistanceapartthanobserversinsidethe
car. Measured distances need not be the same for different observers when relativistic speeds are involved.
Figure 5.8 People might describe distances differently, but at
relativistic speeds, the distances really are different. (credit:
“russavia”/Flickr)
Proper Length
Twoobserverspassingeachotheralwaysseethesamevalueoftheirrelativespeed.Eventhoughtimedilationimpliesthat
the train passenger and the observer standing alongside the tracks measure different times for the train to pass, they still
agreethatrelativespeed,whichisdistancedividedbyelapsedtime,isthesame.Ifanobserveronthegroundandoneonthe
trainmeasureadifferenttimeforthelengthofthetraintopassthegroundobserver,agreeingontheirrelativespeedmeans
they must also see different distances traveled.
ThemuondiscussedinExample 5.3illustratesthisconcept(Figure 5.9).ToanobserveronEarth,themuontravelsat
0.950cfor 7.05 μs from the time it is produced until it decays. Therefore, it travels a distance relative to Earth of:
L =vΔt=(0.950)(3.00×10 8 m/s)(7.05×10 −6 s ⎞ =2.01km.
0 ⎠
In the muon frame, the lifetime of the muon is 2.20 μs. In this frame of reference, the Earth, air, and ground have only
enough time to travel:
L=vΔτ=(0.950)(3.00×10 8 m/s)(2.20×10 −6 s)km=0.627km.
Thedistancebetweenthesametwoevents(productionanddecayofamuon)dependsonwhomeasuresitandhowtheyare
moving relative to it.

202 Chapter 5 | Relativity
Proper Length
Properlength L isthedistancebetweentwopointsmeasuredbyanobserverwhoisatrestrelativetobothofthe
0
points.
Theearthboundobservermeasurestheproperlength L becausethepointsatwhichthemuonisproducedanddecaysare
0
stationaryrelativetoEarth.Tothemuon,Earth,air,andcloudsaremoving,sothedistanceLitseesisnottheproperlength.
Figure 5.9 (a) The earthbound observer sees the muon travel 2.01 km. (b) The same path has length 0.627 km seen from the
muon’s frame of reference. The Earth, air, and clouds are moving relative to the muon in its frame, and have smaller lengths
along the direction of travel.
Length Contraction
Torelatedistancesmeasuredbydifferentobservers,notethatthevelocityrelativetotheearthboundobserverinourmuon
example is given by
L
v= 0.
Δt
Thetimerelativetotheearthboundobserveris Δt, becausetheobjectbeingtimedismovingrelativetothisobserver.The
velocity relative to the moving observer is given by
L
v= .
Δτ
Themovingobservertravelswiththemuonandthereforeobservesthepropertime Δτ. Thetwovelocitiesareidentical;
thus,
L 0 = L .
Δt Δτ
We know that Δt=γΔτ. Substituting this equation into the relationship above gives
L (5.3)
L=
γ
0.
Substituting for γ gives an equation relating the distances measured by different observers.
Length Contraction
Length contraction is the decrease in the measured length of an object from its proper length when measured in a
reference frame that is moving with respect to the object:
(5.4)
v2
L=L 1−
0 c2
where L is the length of the object in its rest frame, andLis the length in the frame moving with velocityv.
0
Ifwemeasurethelengthofanythingmovingrelativetoourframe,wefinditslengthLtobesmallerthantheproperlength
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 5 | Relativity 203
L thatwouldbemeasurediftheobjectwerestationary.Forexample,inthemuon’srestframe,thedistanceEarthmoves
0
betweenwherethemuonwasproducedandwhereitdecayedisshorterthanthedistancetraveledasseenfromtheEarth’s
frame. Those points are fixed relative to Earth but are moving relative to the muon. Clouds and other objects are also
contracted along the direction of motion as seen from muon’s rest frame.
Thus, two observers measure different distances along their direction of relative motion, depending on which one is
measuring distances between objects at rest.
Butwhataboutdistancesmeasuredinadirectionperpendiculartotherelativemotion?Imaginetwoobserversmovingalong
theirx-axesandpassingeachotherwhileholdingmetersticksverticallyinthey-direction.Figure5.10showstwometer
sticksMand M′ thatareatrestinthereferenceframesoftwoboysSand S′, respectively.Asmallpaintbrushisattached
tothetop(the100-cmmark)ofstick M′. Supposethat S′ ismovingtotherightataveryhighspeedvrelativetoS,andthe
sticksareorientedsothattheyareperpendicular,ortransverse,totheirrelativevelocityvector.Thesticksareheldsothat
astheypasseachother,theirlowerends(the0-cmmarks)coincide.AssumethatwhenSlooksathisstickMafterwards,
hefindsalinepaintedonit,justbelowthetopofthestick.Becausethebrushisattachedtothetopoftheotherboy’sstick
M′, S can only conclude that stick M′ is less than 1.0 m long.
Figure 5.10 Meter sticks M and M′ are stationary in the reference
frames of observers S and S′, respectively. As the sticks pass, a
small brush attached to the 100-cm mark of M′ paints a line on M.
Now when the boys approach each other, S′, like S, sees a meter stick moving toward him with speed v. Because their
situationsaresymmetric,eachboymustmakethesamemeasurementofthestickintheotherframe.So,ifSmeasuresstick
M′ tobelessthan1.0mlong, S′ mustmeasurestickMtobealsolessthan1.0mlong,and S′ mustseehispaintbrush
passoverthetopofstickMandnotpaintalineonit.Inotherwords,afterthesameevent,oneboyseesapaintedlineona
stick, while the other does not see such a line on that same stick!
Einstein’sfirstpostulaterequiresthatthelawsofphysics(as,forexample,appliedtopainting)predictthatSand S′, who
arebothininertialframes,makethesameobservations;thatis,Sand S′ musteitherbothseealinepaintedonstickM,or
bothnotseethatline.WearethereforeforcedtoconcludeouroriginalassumptionthatSsawalinepaintedbelowthetop
ofhisstickwaswrong!Instead,Sfindsthelinepaintedrightatthe100-cmmarkonM.Thenbothboyswillagreethata
lineispaintedonM,andtheywillalsoagreethatbothsticksareexactly1mlong.Weconcludethenthatmeasurementsof
a transverselength must be the samein different inertial frames.
Example 5.5
Calculating Length Contraction
Suppose an astronaut, such as the twin in the twin paradox discussion, travels so fast that γ =30.00. (a) The
astronauttravelsfromEarthtotheneareststarsystem,AlphaCentauri,4.300lightyears(ly)awayasmeasured
byanearthboundobserver.HowfarapartareEarthandAlphaCentauriasmeasuredbytheastronaut?(b)Interms
ofc,whatistheastronaut’svelocityrelativetoEarth?YoumayneglectthemotionofEarthrelativetothesun
(Figure 5.11).

204 Chapter 5 | Relativity
Figure 5.11 (a) The earthbound observer measures the proper distance between Earth and Alpha Centauri. (b) The
astronaut observes a length contraction because Earth and Alpha Centauri move relative to her ship. She can travel this
shorter distance in a smaller time (her proper time) without exceeding the speed of light.
Strategy
First,notethatalightyear(ly)isaconvenientunitofdistanceonanastronomicalscale—itisthedistancelight
travels in a year. For part (a), the 4.300-ly distance between Alpha Centauri and Earth is the proper distance
L , because it is measured by an earthbound observer to whom both stars are (approximately) stationary. To
0
theastronaut,EarthandAlphaCentauriaremovingpastatthesamevelocity,sothedistancebetweenthemisthe
contractedlengthL.Inpart(b),wearegiven γ, sowecanfindvbyrearrangingthedefinitionof γ toexpressv
in terms ofc.
Solution for (a)
For part (a):
a. Identify the knowns: L =4.300ly;γ =30.00.
0
b. Identify the unknown:L.
L
c. Express the answer as an equation: L=
γ
0.
d. Do the calculation:
L
L = γ 0
4.300ly
=
30.00
=0.1433ly.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 5 | Relativity 205
Solution for (b)
For part (b):
a. Identify the known: γ =30.00.
b. Identify the unknown:vin terms ofc.
c. Express the answer as an equation. Start with:
γ = 1 .
v2
1−
c2
Then solve for the unknownv/cby first squaring both sides and then rearranging:
γ2 = 1
v2
1−
c2
v2
1
= 1−
c2 γ2
v 1
c = 1− .
γ2
d. Do the calculation:
v 1
c = 1−
γ2
1
= 1−
(30.00)2
=0.99944
or
v=0.9994c.
Significance
Remember not to round off calculations until the final answer, or you could get erroneous results. This is
especially true for special relativity calculations, where the differences might only be revealed after several
decimalplaces.Therelativisticeffectislargehere ⎛γ =30.00⎞, andweseethatvisapproaching(notequaling)
⎝ ⎠
thespeedoflight.Becausethedistanceasmeasuredbytheastronautissomuchsmaller,theastronautcantravel
it in much less time in her frame.
Peopletravelingatextremelyhighvelocitiescouldcoververylargedistances(thousandsorevenmillionsoflightyears)and
ageonlyafewyearsontheway.However,likeemigrantsinpastcenturieswholefttheirhome,thesepeoplewouldleavethe
Earththeyknowforever.Eveniftheyreturned,thousandstomillionsofyearswouldhavepassedonEarth,obliteratingmost
ofwhatnowexists.Thereisalsoamoreseriouspracticalobstacletotravelingatsuchvelocities;immenselygreaterenergies
wouldbeneededtoachievesuchhighvelocitiesthanclassicalphysicspredictscanbeattained.Thiswillbediscussedlater
in the chapter.
Why don’t we notice length contraction in everyday life? The distance to the grocery store does not seem to depend on
v2
whether we are moving or not. Examining the equation L=L 1− , we see that at low velocities (v<<c), the
0 c2
lengthsarenearlyequal,whichistheclassicalexpectation.Butlengthcontractionisreal,ifnotcommonlyexperienced.For
example,achargedparticlesuchasanelectrontravelingatrelativisticvelocityhaselectricfieldlinesthatarecompressed
alongthedirectionofmotionasseenbyastationaryobserver(Figure 5.12).Astheelectronpassesadetector,suchasa
coilofwire,itsfieldinteractsmuchmorebriefly,aneffectobservedatparticleacceleratorssuchasthe3-km-longStanford
LinearAccelerator(SLAC).Infact,toanelectrontravelingdownthebeampipeatSLAC,theacceleratorandEarthareall
movingbyandarelengthcontracted.Therelativisticeffectissogreatthattheacceleratorisonly0.5mlongtotheelectron.
Itisactuallyeasiertogettheelectronbeamdownthepipe,becausethebeamdoesnothavetobeaspreciselyaimedtoget