# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 300-306
############################################################

288 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Using the equation for drag force, we have
Solving for the velocity, we obtain
Assume the density of air is A 75-kg skydiver descending head first has a cross-sectional area of
approximately and a drag coefficient of approximately . We find that
This means a skydiver with a mass of 75 kg achieves a terminal velocity of about 350 km/h while traveling in a
headfirst position, minimizing the area and his drag. In a spread-eagle position, that terminal velocity may decrease
to about 200 km/h as the area increases. This terminal velocity becomes much smaller after the parachute opens.
EXAMPLE 6.17
Terminal Velocity of a Skydiver
Find the terminal velocity of an 85-kg skydiver falling in a spread-eagle position. Assume that in the spread-eagle
position, the diver has a cross-sectional area of .
Strategy
At terminal velocity, Thus, the drag force on the skydiver must equal the force of gravity (the person’s
weight). Using the equation of drag force, we find
Solution
The terminal velocity can be written as
Significance
This result is consistent with the value for mentioned earlier. The 75-kg skydiver going feet first had a terminal
velocity of He weighed less but had a smaller frontal area and so a smaller drag due to the air.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.10
Find the terminal velocity of a 50-kg skydiver falling in spread-eagle fashion.
The size of the object that is falling through air presents another interesting application of air drag. If you fall from a
5-m-high branch of a tree, you will likely get hurt—possibly fracturing a bone. However, a small squirrel does this all
the time, without getting hurt. You do not reach a terminal velocity in such a short distance, but the squirrel does.
The following interesting quote on animal size and terminal velocity is from a 1928 essay by a British biologist, J. B.
S. Haldane, titled “On Being the Right Size.”
“To the mouse and any smaller animal, [gravity] presents practically no dangers. You can drop a mouse down a
thousand-yard mine shaft; and, on arriving at the bottom, it gets a slight shock and walks away, provided that the
ground is fairly soft. A rat is killed, a man is broken, and a horse splashes. For the resistance presented to movement
by the air is proportional to the surface of the moving object. Divide an animal’s length, breadth, and height each by
Access for free at openstax.org

6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 289
ten; its weight is reduced to a thousandth, but its surface only to a hundredth. So the resistance to falling in the case
of the small animal is relatively ten times greater than the driving force.”
The above quadratic dependence of air drag upon velocity does not hold if the object is very small, is going very
slow, or is in a denser medium than air. Then we find that the drag force is proportional just to the velocity. This
relationship is given by Stokes’ law.
STOKES’ LAW
For a spherical object falling in a medium, the drag force is
6.6
where r is the radius of the object, is the viscosity of the fluid, and v is the object’s velocity.
Good examples of Stokes’ law are provided by microorganisms, pollen, and dust particles. Because each of these
objects is so small, we find that many of these objects travel unaided only at a constant (terminal) velocity. Terminal
velocities for bacteria (size about can be about To move at a greater speed, many bacteria swim using
flagella (organelles shaped like little tails) that are powered by little motors embedded in the cell.
Sediment in a lake can move at a greater terminal velocity (about so it can take days for it to reach the
bottom of the lake after being deposited on the surface.
If we compare animals living on land with those in water, you can see how drag has influenced evolution. Fish,
dolphins, and even massive whales are streamlined in shape to reduce drag forces. Birds are streamlined and
migratory species that fly large distances often have particular features such as long necks. Flocks of birds fly in the
shape of a spearhead as the flock forms a streamlined pattern (Figure 6.32). In humans, one important example of
streamlining is the shape of sperm, which need to be efficient in their use of energy.
FIGURE 6.32 Geese fly in a V formation during their long migratory travels. This shape reduces drag and energy consumption for individual
birds, and also allows them a better way to communicate. (credit: modification of work by “Julo”/Wikimedia Commons)
INTERACTIVE
In lecture demonstrations, we do measurements of the drag force (https://openstax.org/l/21dragforce) on different
objects. The objects are placed in a uniform airstream created by a fan. Calculate the drag coefficient.
The Calculus of Velocity-Dependent Frictional Forces
When a body slides across a surface, the frictional force on it is approximately constant and given by
Unfortunately, the frictional force on a body moving through a liquid or a gas does not behave so simply. This drag

290 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
force is generally a complicated function of the body’s velocity. However, for a body moving in a straight line at
moderate speeds through a liquid such as water, the frictional force can often be approximated by
where b is a constant whose value depends on the dimensions and shape of the body and the properties of the
liquid, and v is the velocity of the body. Two situations for which the frictional force can be represented by this
equation are a motorboat moving through water and a small object falling slowly through a liquid.
Let’s consider the object falling through a liquid. The free-body diagram of this object with the positive direction
downward is shown in Figure 6.33. Newton’s second law in the vertical direction gives the differential equation
where we have written the acceleration as As v increases, the frictional force –bv increases until it matches
mg. At this point, there is no acceleration and the velocity remains constant at the terminal velocity From the
previous equation,
so
FIGURE 6.33 Free-body diagram of an object falling through a resistive medium.
We can find the object’s velocity by integrating the differential equation for v. First, we rearrange terms in this
equation to obtain
Assuming that integration of this equation yields
or
where are dummy variables of integration. With the limits given, we find
Since and we obtain
Access for free at openstax.org

6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 291
and
Notice that as ∞ which is the terminal velocity.
The position at any time may be found by integrating the equation for v. With
Assuming
which integrates to
EXAMPLE 6.18
Effect of the Resistive Force on a Motorboat
A motorboat is moving across a lake at a speed when its motor suddenly freezes up and stops. The boat then
slows down under the frictional force (a) What are the velocity and position of the boat as functions of
time? (b) If the boat slows down from 4.0 to 1.0 m/s in 10 s, how far does it travel before stopping?
Solution
a. With the motor stopped, the only horizontal force on the boat is so from Newton’s second law,
which we can write as
Integrating this equation between the time zero when the velocity is and the time t when the velocity is ,
we have
Thus,
which, since we can write this as
Now from the definition of velocity,
so we have
With the initial position zero, we have

292 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
and
As time increases, and the position of the boat approaches a limiting value
Although this tells us that the boat takes an infinite amount of time to reach the boat effectively stops
after a reasonable time. For example, at we have
whereas we also have
Therefore, the boat’s velocity and position have essentially reached their final values.
b. With and we have so
and
Now the boat’s limiting position is
Significance
In the both of the previous examples, we found “limiting” values. The terminal velocity is the same as the limiting
velocity, which is the velocity of the falling object after a (relatively) long time has passed. Similarly, the limiting
distance of the boat is the distance the boat will travel after a long amount of time has passed. Due to the properties
of exponential decay, the time involved to reach either of these values is actually not too long (certainly not an
infinite amount of time!) but they are quickly found by taking the limit to infinity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.11
Suppose the resistive force of the air on a skydiver can be approximated by . If the terminal velocity of a
100-kg skydiver is 60 m/s, what is the value of b?
Access for free at openstax.org

6 • Chapter Review 293
Chapter Review
Key Terms
banked curve curve in a road that is sloping in a friction between the tires and the road; the net
manner that helps a vehicle negotiate the curve external force on the vehicle equals the horizontal
centripetal force any net force causing uniform centripetal force in the absence of friction
circular motion inertial force force that has no physical origin
Coriolis force inertial force causing the apparent kinetic friction force that opposes the motion of two
deflection of moving objects when viewed in a systems that are in contact and moving relative to
rotating frame of reference each other
drag force force that always opposes the motion of noninertial frame of reference accelerated frame of
an object in a fluid; unlike simple friction, the drag reference
force is proportional to some function of the velocity static friction force that opposes the motion of two
of the object in that fluid systems that are in contact and are not moving
friction force that opposes relative motion or relative to each other
attempts at motion between systems in contact terminal velocity constant velocity achieved by a
ideal banking sloping of a curve in a road, where the falling object, which occurs when the weight of the
angle of the slope allows the vehicle to negotiate object is balanced by the upward drag force
the curve at a certain speed without the aid of
Key Equations
Magnitude of static friction
Magnitude of kinetic friction
Centripetal force
Ideal angle of a banked curve
Drag force
Stokes’ law
Summary
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws kinematics and dynamics to solve these
problems.
• Newton’s laws of motion can be applied in
numerous situations to solve motion problems. 6.2 Friction
• Some problems contain multiple force vectors
• Friction is a contact force that opposes the
acting in different directions on an object. Be
motion or attempted motion between two
sure to draw diagrams, resolve all force vectors
systems. Simple friction is proportional to the
into horizontal and vertical components, and
normal force N supporting the two systems.
draw a free-body diagram. Always analyze the
• The magnitude of static friction force between
direction in which an object accelerates so that
two materials stationary relative to each other is
you can determine whether or
determined using the coefficient of static friction,
which depends on both materials.
• The normal force on an object is not always equal
• The kinetic friction force between two materials
in magnitude to the weight of the object. If an
moving relative to each other is determined using
object is accelerating vertically, the normal force
the coefficient of kinetic friction, which also
is less than or greater than the weight of the
depends on both materials and is always less
object. Also, if the object is on an inclined plane,
than the coefficient of static friction.
the normal force is always less than the full
weight of the object. 6.3 Centripetal Force
• Some problems contain several physical
• Centripetal force is a “center-seeking” force
quantities, such as forces, acceleration, velocity,
that always points toward the center of rotation.
or position. You can apply concepts from
It is perpendicular to linear velocity and has the