# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 499-506
############################################################

10.6 • Torque 487
direction of the torque by the right-hand rule is out of the page along the positive z-axis. The disk rotates
counterclockwise due to the torque, in the same direction as a positive angular acceleration.
FIGURE 10.33 A disk is free to rotate about its axis through the center. The magnitude of the torque on the disk is .When , the
torque is zero and the disk does not rotate. When , the torque is maximum and the disk rotates with maximum angular acceleration.
Any number of torques can be calculated about a given axis. The individual torques add to produce a net torque
about the axis. When the appropriate sign (positive or negative) is assigned to the magnitudes of individual torques
about a specified axis, the net torque about the axis is the sum of the individual torques:
10.24
Calculating Net Torque for Rigid Bodies on a Fixed Axis
In the following examples, we calculate the torque both abstractly and as applied to a rigid body.
We first introduce a problem-solving strategy.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Finding Net Torque
1. Choose a coordinate system with the pivot point or axis of rotation as the origin of the selected coordinate
system.
2. Determine the angle between the lever arm and the force vector.
3. Take the cross product of to determine if the torque is positive or negative about the pivot point or
axis.
4. Evaluate the magnitude of the torque using .
5. Assign the appropriate sign, positive or negative, to the magnitude.
6. Sum the torques to find the net torque.
EXAMPLE 10.14
Calculating Torque
Four forces are shown in Figure 10.34 at particular locations and orientations with respect to a given xy-coordinate
system. Find the torque due to each force about the origin, then use your results to find the net torque about the
origin.

488 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.34 Four forces producing torques.
Strategy
This problem requires calculating torque. All known quantities––forces with directions and lever arms––are given in
the figure. The goal is to find each individual torque and the net torque by summing the individual torques. Be
careful to assign the correct sign to each torque by using the cross product of and the force vector .
Solution
Use to find the magnitude and to determine the sign of the torque.
The magnitude of the torque from force 40 N in the first quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is out of the page, positive.
The magnitude of the torque from force 20 N in the third quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is into the page, so it is negative: .
The magnitude of the torque from force 30 N in the third quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is out of the page, positive.
The magnitude of the torque from force 20 N in the second quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is out of the page.
The net magnitude of the torque is therefore
Significance
Note that each force that acts in the counterclockwise direction has a positive torque, whereas each force that acts
in the clockwise direction has a negative torque. The torque is greater when the distance, force, or perpendicular
components are greater.
EXAMPLE 10.15
Calculating Torque on a rigid body
Figure 10.35 shows several forces acting at different locations and angles on a flywheel. We have
, , and . Find the net torque on the flywheel about an axis through the center.
Access for free at openstax.org

10.6 • Torque 489
FIGURE 10.35 Three forces acting on a flywheel.
Strategy
We calculate each torque individually, using the cross product, and determine the sign of the torque. Then we sum
the torques to find the net torque.
Solution
We start with . If we look at Figure 10.35, we see that makes an angle of with the radius vector .
Taking the cross product, we see that it is out of the page and so is positive. We also see this from calculating its
magnitude:
Next we look at . The angle between and is and the cross product is into the page so the torque is
negative. Its value is
When we evaluate the torque due to , we see that the angle it makes with is zero so Therefore,
does not produce any torque on the flywheel.
We evaluate the sum of the torques:
Significance
The axis of rotation is at the center of mass of the flywheel. Since the flywheel is on a fixed axis, it is not free to
translate. If it were on a frictionless surface and not fixed in place, would cause the flywheel to translate, as well
as . Its motion would be a combination of translation and rotation.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.6
A large ocean-going ship runs aground near the coastline, similar to the fate of the Costa Concordia, and lies at an
angle as shown below. Salvage crews must apply a torque to right the ship in order to float the vessel for transport.
A force of acting at point A must be applied to right the ship. What is the torque about the point of

490 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
contact of the ship with the ground (Figure 10.36)?
FIGURE 10.36 A ship runs aground and tilts, requiring torque to be applied to return the vessel to an upright position.
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the torques on rotating systems about a fixed axis to find the angular acceleration
• Explain how changes in the moment of inertia of a rotating system affect angular acceleration with a fixed
applied torque
In this section, we put together all the pieces learned so far in this chapter to analyze the dynamics of rotating rigid
bodies. We have analyzed motion with kinematics and rotational kinetic energy but have not yet connected these
ideas with force and/or torque. In this section, we introduce the rotational equivalent to Newton’s second law of
motion and apply it to rigid bodies with fixed-axis rotation.
Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
We have thus far found many counterparts to the translational terms used throughout this text, most recently,
torque, the rotational analog to force. This raises the question: Is there an analogous equation to Newton’s second
law, which involves torque and rotational motion? To investigate this, we start with Newton’s second law
for a single particle rotating around an axis and executing circular motion. Let’s exert a force on a point mass m
that is at a distance r from a pivot point (Figure 10.37). The particle is constrained to move in a circular path with
fixed radius and the force is tangent to the circle. We apply Newton’s second law to determine the magnitude of the
acceleration in the direction of . Recall that the magnitude of the tangential acceleration is proportional
to the magnitude of the angular acceleration by . Substituting this expression into Newton’s second law, we
obtain
Access for free at openstax.org

10.7 • Newton’s Second Law for Rotation 491
FIGURE 10.37 An object is supported by a horizontal frictionless table and is attached to a pivot point by a cord that supplies centripetal
force. A force is applied to the object perpendicular to the radius r, causing it to accelerate about the pivot point. The force is
perpendicular to r.
Multiply both sides of this equation by r,
Note that the left side of this equation is the torque about the axis of rotation, where r is the lever arm and F is the
force, perpendicular to r. Recall that the moment of inertia for a point particle is . The torque applied
perpendicularly to the point mass in Figure 10.37 is therefore
The torque on the particle is equal to the moment of inertia about the rotation axis times the angular acceleration.
We can generalize this equation to a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW FOR ROTATION
If more than one torque acts on a rigid body about a fixed axis, then the sum of the torques equals the moment
of inertia times the angular acceleration:
10.25
The term is a scalar quantity and can be positive or negative (counterclockwise or clockwise) depending upon
the sign of the net torque. Remember the convention that counterclockwise angular acceleration is positive. Thus, if
a rigid body is rotating clockwise and experiences a positive torque (counterclockwise), the angular acceleration is
positive.
Equation 10.25 is Newton’s second law for rotation and tells us how to relate torque, moment of inertia, and
rotational kinematics. This is called the equation for rotational dynamics. With this equation, we can solve a whole
class of problems involving force and rotation. It makes sense that the relationship for how much force it takes to
rotate a body would include the moment of inertia, since that is the quantity that tells us how easy or hard it is to
change the rotational motion of an object.
Deriving Newton’s Second Law for Rotation in Vector Form
As before, when we found the angular acceleration, we may also find the torque vector. The second law
tells us the relationship between net force and how to change the translational motion of an object. We have a
vector rotational equivalent of this equation, which can be found by using Equation 10.7 and Figure 10.8. Equation
10.7 relates the angular acceleration to the position and tangential acceleration vectors:
We form the cross product of this equation with and use a cross product identity (note that ):

492 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
We now form the cross product of Newton’s second law with the position vector
Identifying the first term on the left as the sum of the torques, and as the moment of inertia, we arrive at
Newton’s second law of rotation in vector form:
10.26
This equation is exactly Equation 10.25 but with the torque and angular acceleration as vectors. An important point
is that the torque vector is in the same direction as the angular acceleration.
Applying the Rotational Dynamics Equation
Before we apply the rotational dynamics equation to some everyday situations, let’s review a general problem-
solving strategy for use with this category of problems.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rotational Dynamics
1. Examine the situation to determine that torque and mass are involved in the rotation. Draw a careful sketch of
the situation.
2. Determine the system of interest.
3. Draw a free-body diagram. That is, draw and label all external forces acting on the system of interest.
4. Identify the pivot point. If the object is in equilibrium, it must be in equilibrium for all possible pivot
points––chose the one that simplifies your work the most.
5. Apply , the rotational equivalent of Newton’s second law, to solve the problem. Care must be taken
to use the correct moment of inertia and to consider the torque about the point of rotation.
6. As always, check the solution to see if it is reasonable.
EXAMPLE 10.16
Calculating the Effect of Mass Distribution on a Merry-Go-Round
Consider the father pushing a playground merry-go-round in Figure 10.38. He exerts a force of 250 N at the edge of
the 50.0-kg merry-go-round, which has a 1.50-m radius. Calculate the angular acceleration produced (a) when no
one is on the merry-go-round and (b) when an 18.0-kg child sits 1.25 m away from the center. Consider the merry-
go-round itself to be a uniform disk with negligible friction.
FIGURE 10.38 A father pushes a playground merry-go-round at its edge and perpendicular to its radius to achieve maximum torque.
Access for free at openstax.org

10.7 • Newton’s Second Law for Rotation 493
Strategy
The net torque is given directly by the expression , To solve for , we must first calculate the net torque
(which is the same in both cases) and moment of inertia I (which is greater in the second case).
Solution
a. The moment of inertia of a solid disk about this axis is given in Figure 10.20 to be
We have and , so
To find the net torque, we note that the applied force is perpendicular to the radius and friction is negligible, so
that
Now, after we substitute the known values, we find the angular acceleration to be
b. We expect the angular acceleration for the system to be less in this part because the moment of inertia is
greater when the child is on the merry-go-round. To find the total moment of inertia I, we first find the child’s
moment of inertia by approximating the child as a point mass at a distance of 1.25 m from the axis. Then
The total moment of inertia is the sum of the moments of inertia of the merry-go-round and the child (about
the same axis):
Substituting known values into the equation for α gives
Significance
The angular acceleration is less when the child is on the merry-go-round than when the merry-go-round is empty, as
expected. The angular accelerations found are quite large, partly due to the fact that friction was considered to be
negligible. If, for example, the father kept pushing perpendicularly for 2.00 s, he would give the merry-go-round an
angular velocity of 13.3 rad/s when it is empty but only 8.89 rad/s when the child is on it. In terms of revolutions per
second, these angular velocities are 2.12 rev/s and 1.41 rev/s, respectively. The father would end up running at
about 50 km/h in the first case.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.7
The fan blades on a jet engine have a moment of inertia . In 10 s, they rotate counterclockwise from rest
up to a rotation rate of 20 rev/s. (a) What torque must be applied to the blades to achieve this angular acceleration?
(b) What is the torque required to bring the fan blades rotating at 20 rev/s to a rest in 20 s?