# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 730-736
############################################################

718 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.10 Graphs of y(t), v(t), and a(t) versus t for the motion of an object on a vertical spring. The net force on the object can be
described by Hooke’s law, so the object undergoes SHM. Note that the initial position has the vertical displacement at its maximum value A;
v is initially zero and then negative as the object moves down; the initial acceleration is negative, back toward the equilibrium position and
becomes zero at that point.
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the energy conservation of the system of a mass and a spring
• Explain the concepts of stable and unstable equilibrium points
To produce a deformation in an object, we must do work. That is, whether you pluck a guitar string or compress a
car’s shock absorber, a force must be exerted through a distance. If the only result is deformation, and no work goes
Access for free at openstax.org

15.2 • Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion 719
into thermal, sound, or kinetic energy, then all the work is initially stored in the deformed object as some form of
potential energy.
Consider the example of a block attached to a spring on a frictionless table, oscillating in SHM. The force of the
spring is a conservative force (which you studied in the chapter on potential energy and conservation of energy), and
we can define a potential energy for it. This potential energy is the energy stored in the spring when the spring is
extended or compressed. In this case, the block oscillates in one dimension with the force of the spring acting
parallel to the motion:
When considering the energy stored in a spring, the equilibrium position, marked as is the position at
which the energy stored in the spring is equal to zero. When the spring is stretched or compressed a distance x, the
potential energy stored in the spring is
Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator
To study the energy of a simple harmonic oscillator, we need to consider all the forms of energy. Consider the
example of a block attached to a spring, placed on a frictionless surface, oscillating in SHM. The potential energy
stored in the deformation of the spring is
In a simple harmonic oscillator, the energy oscillates between kinetic energy of the mass and potential
energy stored in the spring. In the SHM of the mass and spring system, there are no dissipative forces,
so the total energy is the sum of the potential energy and kinetic energy. In this section, we consider the
conservation of energy of the system. The concepts examined are valid for all simple harmonic oscillators, including
those where the gravitational force plays a role.
Consider Figure 15.11, which shows an oscillating block attached to a spring. In the case of undamped SHM, the
energy oscillates back and forth between kinetic and potential, going completely from one form of energy to the
other as the system oscillates. So for the simple example of an object on a frictionless surface attached to a spring,
the motion starts with all of the energy stored in the spring as elastic potential energy. As the object starts to move,
the elastic potential energy is converted into kinetic energy, becoming entirely kinetic energy at the equilibrium
position. The energy is then converted back into elastic potential energy by the spring as it is stretched or
compressed. The velocity becomes zero when the kinetic energy is completely converted, and this cycle then
repeats. Understanding the conservation of energy in these cycles will provide extra insight here and in later
applications of SHM, such as alternating circuits.

720 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.11 The transformation of energy in SHM for an object attached to a spring on a frictionless surface. (a) When the mass is at the
position , all the energy is stored as potential energy in the spring . The kinetic energy is equal to zero because the
velocity of the mass is zero. (b) As the mass moves toward , the mass crosses the position . At this point, the spring is neither
extended nor compressed, so the potential energy stored in the spring is zero. At , the total energy is all kinetic energy where
. (c) The mass continues to move until it reaches where the mass stops and starts moving toward . At
the position , the total energy is stored as potential energy in the compressed and the kinetic energy is zero. (d) As
the mass passes through the position , the kinetic energy is and the potential energy stored in the spring is zero. (e)
The mass returns to the position , where and .
Consider Figure 15.11, which shows the energy at specific points on the periodic motion. While staying constant, the
energy oscillates between the kinetic energy of the block and the potential energy stored in the spring:
The motion of the block on a spring in SHM is defined by the position with a velocity of
. Using these equations, the trigonometric identity and , we
can find the total energy of the system:
The total energy of the system of a block and a spring is equal to the sum of the potential energy stored in the spring
plus the kinetic energy of the block and is proportional to the square of the amplitude The total
energy of the system is constant.
A closer look at the energy of the system shows that the kinetic energy oscillates like a sine-squared function, while
the potential energy oscillates like a cosine-squared function. However, the total energy for the system is constant
and is proportional to the amplitude squared. Figure 15.12 shows a plot of the potential, kinetic, and total energies
of the block and spring system as a function of time. Also plotted are the position and velocity as a function of time.
Before time the block is attached to the spring and placed at the equilibrium position. Work is done on the
Access for free at openstax.org

15.2 • Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion 721
block by applying an external force, pulling it out to a position of . The system now has potential energy
stored in the spring. At time the position of the block is equal to the amplitude, the potential energy
stored in the spring is equal to , and the force on the block is maximum and points in the negative
x-direction . The velocity and kinetic energy of the block are zero at time At time
the block is released from rest.
FIGURE 15.12 Graph of the kinetic energy, potential energy, and total energy of a block oscillating on a spring in SHM. Also shown are the
graphs of position versus time and velocity versus time. The total energy remains constant, but the energy oscillates between kinetic
energy and potential energy. When the kinetic energy is maximum, the potential energy is zero. This occurs when the velocity is maximum
and the mass is at the equilibrium position. The potential energy is maximum when the speed is zero. The total energy is the sum of the
kinetic energy plus the potential energy and it is constant.
Oscillations About an Equilibrium Position
We have just considered the energy of SHM as a function of time. Another interesting view of the simple harmonic
oscillator is to consider the energy as a function of position. Figure 15.13 shows a graph of the energy versus
position of a system undergoing SHM.
FIGURE 15.13 A graph of the kinetic energy (red), potential energy (blue), and total energy (green) of a simple harmonic oscillator. The
force is equal to . The equilibrium position is shown as a black dot and is the point where the force is equal to zero. The force is
positive when , negative when , and equal to zero when .
The potential energy curve in Figure 15.13 resembles a bowl. When a marble is placed in a bowl, it settles to the
equilibrium position at the lowest point of the bowl . This happens because a restoring force points toward

722 15 • Oscillations
the equilibrium point. This equilibrium point is sometimes referred to as a fixed point. When the marble is disturbed
to a different position , the marble oscillates around the equilibrium position. Looking back at the graph of
potential energy, the force can be found by looking at the slope of the potential energy graph . Since the
force on either side of the fixed point points back toward the equilibrium point, the equilibrium point is called a
stable equilibrium point. The points and are called the turning points. (See Potential Energy and
Conservation of Energy.)
Stability is an important concept. If an equilibrium point is stable, a slight disturbance of an object that is initially at
the stable equilibrium point will cause the object to oscillate around that point. The stable equilibrium point occurs
because the force on either side is directed toward it. For an unstable equilibrium point, if the object is disturbed
slightly, it does not return to the equilibrium point.
Consider the marble in the bowl example. If the bowl is right-side up, the marble, if disturbed slightly, will oscillate
around the stable equilibrium point. If the bowl is turned upside down, the marble can be balanced on the top, at
the equilibrium point where the net force is zero. However, if the marble is disturbed slightly, it will not return to the
equilibrium point, but will instead roll off the bowl. The reason is that the force on either side of the equilibrium
point is directed away from that point. This point is an unstable equilibrium point.
Figure 15.14 shows three conditions. The first is a stable equilibrium point (a), the second is an unstable equilibrium
point (b), and the last is also an unstable equilibrium point (c), because the force on only one side points toward the
equilibrium point.
FIGURE 15.14 Examples of equilibrium points. (a) Stable equilibrium point; (b) unstable equilibrium point; (c) unstable equilibrium point
(sometimes referred to as a half-stable equilibrium point).
The process of determining whether an equilibrium point is stable or unstable can be formalized. Consider the
potential energy curves shown in Figure 15.15. The force can be found by analyzing the slope of the graph. The force
is In (a), the fixed point is at When the force is positive. When the
force is negative. This is a stable point. In (b), the fixed point is at When the force is
negative. When the force is also negative. This is an unstable point.
Access for free at openstax.org

15.2 • Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion 723
FIGURE 15.15 Two examples of a potential energy function. The force at a position is equal to the negative of the slope of the graph at that
position. (a) A potential energy function with a stable equilibrium point. (b) A potential energy function with an unstable equilibrium point.
This point is sometimes called half-stable because the force on one side points toward the fixed point.
A practical application of the concept of stable equilibrium points is the force between two neutral atoms in a
molecule. If two molecules are in close proximity, separated by a few atomic diameters, they can experience an
attractive force. If the molecules move close enough so that the electron shells of the other electrons overlap, the
force between the molecules becomes repulsive. The attractive force between the two atoms may cause the atoms
to form a molecule. The force between the two molecules is not a linear force and cannot be modeled simply as two
masses separated by a spring, but the atoms of the molecule can oscillate around an equilibrium point when
displaced a small amount from the equilibrium position. The atoms oscillate due the attractive force and repulsive
force between the two atoms.
Consider one example of the interaction between two atoms known as the van Der Waals interaction. It is beyond
the scope of this chapter to discuss in depth the interactions of the two atoms, but the oscillations of the atoms can
be examined by considering one example of a model of the potential energy of the system. One suggestion to model
the potential energy of this molecule is with the Lennard-Jones 6-12 potential:
A graph of this function is shown in Figure 15.16. The two parameters and are found experimentally.