# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 665-672
############################################################

CHAPTER 14
Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.1 This pressure map (left) and satellite photo (right) were used to model the path and impact of Hurricane Arthur as it
traveled up the East Coast of the United States in July 2014. Computer models use force and energy equations to predict developing
weather patterns. Scientists numerically integrate these time-dependent equations, along with the energy budgets of long- and short-
wave solar energy, to model changes in the atmosphere. The pressure map on the left was created using the Weather Research and
Forecasting Model designed at the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The colors represent the height of the 850-mbar pressure
surface. (credit left: modification of work by The National Center for Atmospheric Research; credit right: modification of work by NRL
Monterey Marine Meteorology Division, The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure
14.2 Measuring Pressure
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
INTRODUCTION Picture yourself walking along a beach on the eastern shore of the United States. The air smells of
sea salt and the sun warms your body. Suddenly, an alert appears on your cell phone. A tropical depression has
formed into a hurricane. Atmospheric pressure has fallen to nearly 15% below average. As a result, forecasters
expect torrential rainfall, winds in excess of 100 mph, and millions of dollars in damage. As you prepare to evacuate,
you wonder: How can such a small drop in pressure lead to such a severe change in the weather?
Pressure is a physical phenomenon that is responsible for much more than just the weather. Changes in pressure
cause ears to “pop” during takeoff in an airplane. Changes in pressure can also cause scuba divers to suffer a
sometimes fatal disorder known as the “bends,” which occurs when nitrogen dissolved in the water of the body at

654 14 • Fluid Mechanics
extreme depths returns to a gaseous state in the body as the diver surfaces. Pressure lies at the heart of the
phenomena called buoyancy, which causes hot air balloons to rise and ships to float. Before we can fully understand
the role that pressure plays in these phenomena, we need to discuss the states of matter and the concept of
density.
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the different phases of matter
• Describe the characteristics of the phases of matter at the molecular or atomic level
• Distinguish between compressible and incompressible materials
• Define density and its related SI units
• Compare and contrast the densities of various substances
• Define pressure and its related SI units
• Explain the relationship between pressure and force
• Calculate force given pressure and area
Matter most commonly exists as a solid, liquid, or gas; these states are known as the three common phases of
matter. We will look at each of these phases in detail in this section.
Characteristics of Solids
Solids are rigid and have specific shapes and definite volumes. The atoms or molecules in a solid are in close
proximity to each other, and there is a significant force between these molecules. Solids will take a form determined
by the nature of these forces between the molecules. Although true solids are not incompressible, it nevertheless
requires a large force to change the shape of a solid. In some cases, the force between molecules can cause the
molecules to organize into a lattice as shown in Figure 14.2. The structure of this three-dimensional lattice is
represented as molecules connected by rigid bonds (modeled as stiff springs), which allow limited freedom for
movement. Even a large force produces only small displacements in the atoms or molecules of the lattice, and the
solid maintains its shape. Solids also resist shearing forces. (Shearing forces are forces applied tangentially to a
surface, as described in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity.)
Characteristics of Fluids
Liquids and gases are considered to be fluids because they yield to shearing forces, whereas solids resist them. Like
solids, the molecules in a liquid are bonded to neighboring molecules, but possess many fewer of these bonds. The
molecules in a liquid are not locked in place and can move with respect to each other. The distance between
molecules is similar to the distances in a solid, and so liquids have definite volumes, but the shape of a liquid
changes, depending on the shape of its container. Gases are not bonded to neighboring atoms and can have large
separations between molecules. Gases have neither specific shapes nor definite volumes, since their molecules
move to fill the container in which they are held (Figure 14.2).
Access for free at openstax.org

14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 655
FIGURE 14.2 (a) Atoms in a solid are always in close contact with neighboring atoms, held in place by forces represented here by springs.
(b) Atoms in a liquid are also in close contact but can slide over one another. Forces between the atoms strongly resist attempts to
compress the atoms. (c) Atoms in a gas move about freely and are separated by large distances. A gas must be held in a closed container to
prevent it from expanding freely and escaping.
Liquids deform easily when stressed and do not spring back to their original shape once a force is removed. This
occurs because the atoms or molecules in a liquid are free to slide about and change neighbors. That is, liquids flow
(so they are a type of fluid), with the molecules held together by mutual attraction. When a liquid is placed in a
container with no lid, it remains in the container. Because the atoms are closely packed, liquids, like solids, resist
compression; an extremely large force is necessary to change the volume of a liquid.
In contrast, atoms in gases are separated by large distances, and the forces between atoms in a gas are therefore
very weak, except when the atoms collide with one another. This makes gases relatively easy to compress and
allows them to flow (which makes them fluids). When placed in an open container, gases, unlike liquids, will escape.
In this chapter, we generally refer to both gases and liquids simply as fluids, making a distinction between them only
when they behave differently. There exists one other phase of matter, plasma, which exists at very high
temperatures. At high temperatures, molecules may disassociate into atoms, and atoms disassociate into electrons
(with negative charges) and protons (with positive charges), forming a plasma. Plasma will not be discussed in depth
in this chapter because plasma has very different properties from the three other common phases of matter,
discussed in this chapter, due to the strong electrical forces between the charges.
Density
Suppose a block of brass and a block of wood have exactly the same mass. If both blocks are dropped in a tank of
water, why does the wood float and the brass sink (Figure 14.3)? This occurs because the brass has a greater
density than water, whereas the wood has a lower density than water.

656 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.3 (a) A block of brass and a block of wood both have the same weight and mass, but the block of wood has a much greater
volume. (b) When placed in a fish tank filled with water, the cube of brass sinks and the block of wood floats. (The block of wood is the same
in both pictures; it was turned on its side to fit on the scale.) (credit: modification of works by Joseph J. Trout, Stockton University)
Density is an important characteristic of substances. It is crucial, for example, in determining whether an object
sinks or floats in a fluid.
DENSITY
The average density of a substance or object is defined as its mass per unit volume,
14.1
where the Greek letter (rho) is the symbol for density, m is the mass, and V is the volume.
The SI unit of density is . Table 14.1 lists some representative values. The cgs unit of density is the gram per
cubic centimeter, , where
The metric system was originally devised so that water would have a density of , equivalent to .
Thus, the basic mass unit, the kilogram, was first devised to be the mass of 1000 mL of water, which has a volume of
.
Solids Liquids Gases
( ) ( ) ( 101.3 kPa)
Substance Substance Substance
Aluminum Benzene Air
Bone Blood Carbon dioxide
Brass Ethyl alcohol Carbon monoxide
Concrete Gasoline Helium
TABLE 14.1 Densities of Some Common Substances
Access for free at openstax.org

14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 657
Solids Liquids Gases
( ) ( ) ( 101.3 kPa)
Copper Glycerin Hydrogen
Cork Mercury Methane
Earth’s crust Olive oil Nitrogen
Glass Nitrous oxide
Gold Oxygen
Granite
Iron
Lead
Oak
Pine
Platinum
Polystyrene
Tungsten
Uranium
TABLE 14.1 Densities of Some Common Substances
As you can see by examining Table 14.1, the density of an object may help identify its composition. The density of
gold, for example, is about 2.5 times the density of iron, which is about 2.5 times the density of aluminum. Density
also reveals something about the phase of the matter and its substructure. Notice that the densities of liquids and
solids are roughly comparable, consistent with the fact that their atoms are in close contact. The densities of gases
are much less than those of liquids and solids, because the atoms in gases are separated by large amounts of empty
space. The gases are displayed for a standard temperature of and a standard pressure of 101.3 kPa, and
there is a strong dependence of the densities on temperature and pressure. The densities of the solids and liquids
displayed are given for the standard temperature of and the densities of solids and liquids depend on the
temperature. The density of solids and liquids normally increase with decreasing temperature.
Table 14.2 shows the density of water in various phases and temperature. The density of water increases with
decreasing temperature, reaching a maximum at and then decreases as the temperature falls below .
This behavior of the density of water explains why ice forms at the top of a body of water.
Substance
Ice
Water
TABLE 14.2 Densities of Water

658 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Substance
Water
Water
Water
Steam
Sea water
TABLE 14.2 Densities of Water
The density of a substance is not necessarily constant throughout the volume of a substance. If the density is
constant throughout a substance, the substance is said to be a homogeneous substance. A solid iron bar is an
example of a homogeneous substance. The density is constant throughout, and the density of any sample of the
substance is the same as its average density. If the density of a substance were not constant, the substance is said
to be a heterogeneous substance. A chunk of Swiss cheese is an example of a heterogeneous material containing
both the solid cheese and gas-filled voids. The density at a specific location within a heterogeneous material is
called local density, and is given as a function of location, (Figure 14.4).
FIGURE 14.4 Density may vary throughout a heterogeneous mixture. Local density at a point is obtained from dividing mass by volume in a
small volume around a given point.
Local density can be obtained by a limiting process, based on the average density in a small volume around the point
in question, taking the limit where the size of the volume approaches zero,
14.2
where is the density, m is the mass, and V is the volume.
Since gases are free to expand and contract, the densities of the gases vary considerably with temperature, whereas
the densities of liquids vary little with temperature. Therefore, the densities of liquids are often treated as constant,
with the density equal to the average density.
Density is a dimensional property; therefore, when comparing the densities of two substances, the units must be
taken into consideration. For this reason, a more convenient, dimensionless quantity called the specific gravity is
often used to compare densities. Specific gravity is defined as the ratio of the density of the material to the density
of water at and one atmosphere of pressure, which is :
Access for free at openstax.org

14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 659
The comparison uses water because the density of water is , which was originally used to define the
kilogram. Specific gravity, being dimensionless, provides a ready comparison among materials without having to
worry about the unit of density. For instance, the density of aluminum is 2.7 in (2700 in ), but its
specific gravity is 2.7, regardless of the unit of density. Specific gravity is a particularly useful quantity with regard to
buoyancy, which we will discuss later in this chapter.
Pressure
You have no doubt heard the word ‘pressure’ used in relation to blood (high or low blood pressure) and in relation to
weather (high- and low-pressure weather systems). These are only two of many examples of pressure in fluids.
(Recall that we introduced the idea of pressure in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity, in the context of bulk stress and
strain.)
PRESSURE
Pressure (p) is defined as the normal force F per unit area A over which the force is applied, or
14.3
To define the pressure at a specific point, the pressure is defined as the force dF exerted by a fluid over an
infinitesimal element of area dA containing the point, resulting in .
A given force can have a significantly different effect, depending on the area over which the force is exerted. For
instance, a force applied to an area of has a pressure that is 100 times as great as the same force applied to
an area of That is why a sharp needle is able to poke through skin when a small force is exerted, but applying
the same force with a finger does not puncture the skin (Figure 14.5).
FIGURE 14.5 (a) A person being poked with a finger might be irritated, but the force has little lasting effect. (b) In contrast, the same force
applied to an area the size of the sharp end of a needle is enough to break the skin.
Note that although force is a vector, pressure is a scalar. Pressure is a scalar quantity because it is defined to be
proportional to the magnitude of the force acting perpendicular to the surface area. The SI unit for pressure is the
pascal (Pa), named after the French mathematician and physicist Blaise Pascal (1623–1662), where
Several other units are used for pressure, which we discuss later in the chapter.
Variation of pressure with depth in a fluid of constant density
Pressure is defined for all states of matter, but it is particularly important when discussing fluids. An important
characteristic of fluids is that there is no significant resistance to the component of a force applied parallel to the