# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 444-450
############################################################

436 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
Inmodernelectronicdevices,digitalsignalsareusedwithdiodesandtransistorstoperformtaskssuchasdatamanipulation.
Electric circuits carry two types of electrical signals: analog and digital (Figure 9.28). An analog signal varies
continuously, whereas a digital signal switches between two fixed voltage values, such as plus 1 volt and zero volts. In
digitalcircuitslikethosefoundincomputers,atransistorbehaveslikeanon-offswitch.Thetransistoriseitheron,meaning
thevalveiscompletelyopen,oritisoff,meaningthevalveiscompletelyclosed.Integratedcircuitscontainvastcollections
oftransistorsonasinglepieceofsilicon.Theyaredesignedtohandledigitalsignalsthatrepresentonesandzeroes,which
is also known as binary code. The invention of the ic helped to launch the modern computer revolution.
Figure 9.28 Real-world data are often analog, meaning data can vary continuously.
Intensity values of sound or visual images are usually analog. These data are converted
into digital signals for electronic processing in recording devices or computers. The
digital signal is generated from the analog signal by requiring certain voltage cut-off
value.
9.8 | Superconductivity
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the main features of a superconductor
• Describe the BCS theory of superconductivity
• Determine the critical magnetic field for T = 0 K from magnetic field data
• Calculate the maximum emf or current for a wire to remain superconducting
Electrical resistance can be considered as a measure of the frictional force in electrical current flow. Thus, electrical
resistance is a primary source of energy dissipation in electrical systems such as electromagnets, electric motors, and
transmissionlines.Copperwireiscommonlyusedinelectricalwiringbecauseithasoneofthelowestroom-temperature
electricalresistivitiesamongcommonconductors.(Actually,silverhasalowerresistivitythancopper,butthehighcostand
limited availability of silver outweigh its savings in energy over copper.)
Althoughourdiscussionofconductivityseemstoimplythatallmaterialsmusthaveelectricalresistance,weknowthatthis
isnotthecase.Whenthetemperaturedecreasesbelowacriticalvalueformanymaterials,theirelectricalresistivitydrops
tozero,andthematerialsbecomesuperconductors(seeSuperconductors (http://cnx.org/content/m58735/latest/)
).
Watch this NOVA video (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21NOVA) excerpt, Making Stuff Colder, as an
introduction to the topic of superconductivity and its many applications.
Properties of Superconductors
Inaddition tozero electrical resistance, superconductors also have perfect diamagnetism. Inother words,inthe presence
of an applied magnetic field, the net magnetic field within a superconductor is always zero (Figure 9.29). Therefore,
any magnetic field lines that pass through a superconducting sample when it is in its normal state are expelled once the
samplebecomessuperconducting.ThesearemanifestationsoftheMeissnereffect,whichyoulearnedaboutinthechapter
on current and resistance.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 437
Figure 9.29 (a) In the Meissner effect, a magnetic field is expelled from a material once it becomes
superconducting. (b) A magnet can levitate above a superconducting material, supported by the force expelling the
magnetic field. (credit b: modification of work by Kevin Jarrett)
Interestingly,theMeissnereffectisnotaconsequenceoftheresistancebeingzero.Toseewhy,supposethatasampleplaced
inamagneticfieldundergoesatransitioninwhichitsresistancedropstozero.FromOhm’slaw,thecurrentdensity,j,in
thesampleisrelatedtothenetinternalelectricfield,E,andtheresistivity ρ by j=E/ρ.If ρ iszero,Emustalsobezero
so thatjcan remain finite. NowEand the magnetic flux Φm through the sample are related by Faraday’s law as
∮EdI = −
dΦm. (9.38)
dt
If E is zero, dΦm/dt is also zero, that is, the magnetic flux through the sample cannot change. The magnetic field lines
within the sample should therefore not be expelled when the transition occurs. Hence, it does not follow that a material
whose resistance goes to zero has to exhibit the Meissner effect. Rather, the Meissner effect is a special property of
superconductors.
Another important property of a superconducting material is its critical temperature, T , the temperature below which
c
the material is superconducting. The known range of critical temperatures is from a fraction of 1 K to slightly above
100 K. Superconductors with critical temperatures near this higher limit are commonly known as “high-temperature”
superconductors. From a practical standpoint, superconductors for which T c≫77K are very important. At present,
applications involving superconductors often still require that superconducting materials be immersed in liquid helium
(4.2 K) in order to keep them below their critical temperature. The liquid helium baths must be continually replenished
becauseofevaporation,andcoolingcostscaneasilyoutweighthesavingsinusingasuperconductor.However,77Kisthe
temperature of liquid nitrogen, which is far more abundant and inexpensive than liquid helium. It would be much more
cost-effectiveifwecouldeasilyfabricateandusehigh-temperaturesuperconductorcomponentsthatonlyneedtobekept
in liquid nitrogen baths to maintain their superconductivity.
High-temperature superconducting materials are presently in use in various applications. An example is the production
of magnetic fields in some particle accelerators. The ultimate goal is to discover materials that are superconducting at
room temperature. Without any cooling requirements, the bulk of electronic components and transmission lines could be
superconducting, resulting in dramatic and unprecedented increases in efficiency and performance.
Another important property of a superconducting material is its critical magnetic field B c(T), which is the maximum
applied magnetic field at a temperature T that will allow a material to remain superconducting. An applied field that is
greater than the critical field will destroy the superconductivity. The critical field is zero at the critical temperature and
increasesasthetemperaturedecreases.Plotsofthecriticalfieldversustemperatureforseveralsuperconductingmaterials
are shown inFigure 9.30. The temperature dependence of the critical field can be described approximately by

438 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
⎡ 2⎤ (9.39)
⎛T ⎞
B
c
(T)=B
c
(0)⎢1−
⎝T ⎠
⎥
⎣ c ⎦
where B c(0) isthecriticalfieldatabsolutezerotemperature.Table 9.5liststhecriticaltemperaturesandfieldsfortwo
classes of superconductors: type I superconductor and type II superconductor. In general, type I superconductors are
elements,suchasaluminumandmercury.TheyareperfectlydiamagneticbelowacriticalfieldB (T),andenterthenormal
C
non-superconductingstateoncethatfieldisexceeded.ThecriticalfieldsoftypeIsuperconductorsaregenerallyquitelow
(wellbelowonetesla).Forthisreason,theycannotbeusedinapplicationsrequiringtheproductionofhighmagneticfields,
which would destroy their superconducting state.
Figure 9.30 The temperature dependence of the critical field
for several superconductors. Superconductivity occurs for
magnetic fields and temperatures below the curves shown.
Material Critical Temperature (K) Critical Magnetic Field (T)
Type I
Al 1.2 0.011
Ga 1.1 0.0051
Hg(α) 4.2 0.041
In 3.4 0.029
Nb 9.3 0.20
Pb 7.2 0.080
Sn 3.7 0.031
Th 1.4 0.00016
Zn 0.87 0.0053
Table 9.5Critical Temperature and Critical Magnetic Field at T=0K for
Various Superconductors
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 439
Material Critical Temperature (K) Critical Magnetic Field (T)
Type II
Nb Al 18 32
3
Nb Ge 23 38
3
Nb Sn 18 25
3
NbTi 9.3 15
YBa Cu O 92 >100
2 3 7
Table 9.5Critical Temperature and Critical Magnetic Field at T=0K for
Various Superconductors
TypeIIsuperconductorsaregenerallycompoundsoralloysinvolvingtransitionmetalsoractinideserieselements.Almost
all superconductors with relatively high critical temperatures are type II. They have two critical fields, represented by
B (T) and B (T).Whenthefieldisbelow B (T), typeIIsuperconductorsareperfectlydiamagnetic,andnomagnetic
c1 c2 c1
flux penetration into the material can occur. For a field exceeding B (T), they are driven into their normal state.
c2
When the field is greater than B (T) but less than B (T), type II superconductors are said to be in a mixed state.
c1 c2
Although there is some magnetic flux penetration in the mixed state, the resistance of the material is zero. Within the
superconductor,filament-likeregionsexistthathavenormalelectricalandmagneticpropertiesinterspersedbetweenregions
thataresuperconductingwithperfectdiamagnetism.ArepresentationofthisstateisgiveninFigure 9.31.Themagnetic
field is expelled from the superconducting regions but exists in the normal regions. In general, B (T) is very large
c2
comparedwiththecriticalfieldsoftypeIsuperconductors,sowiremadeoftypeIIsuperconductingmaterialissuitablefor
the windings of high-field magnets.
Figure 9.31 A schematic representation of the mixed state of
a type II superconductor. Superconductors (the gray squares)
expel magnetic fields in their vicinity.

440 Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics
Example 9.7
Niobium Wire
Inanexperiment,aniobium(Nb)wireofradius0.25mmisimmersedinliquidhelium(T =4.2K)andrequired
to carry a current of 300 A. Does the wire remain superconducting?
Strategy
Theappliedmagneticfieldcanbedeterminedfromtheradiusofthewireandcurrent.Thecriticalmagneticfield
canbedeterminedfromEquation9.1,thepropertiesofthesuperconductor,andthetemperature.Iftheapplied
magnetic field is greater than the critical field, then superconductivity in the Nb wire is destroyed.
Solution
At T =4.2K, the critical field for Nb is, fromEquation 9.1andTable 9.5,
⎡ 2⎤
B c(4.2K)=B c(0)
⎣
⎢1− ⎛
⎝
4
9
.
.
2
3
K
K
⎞
⎠ ⎦
⎥=(0.20T)(0.80)=0.16T.
In an earlier chapter, we learned the magnetic field inside a current-carrying wire of radiusais given by
µ I
B= 0 ,
2πa
µ I
whereristhedistancefromthecentralaxisofthewire.Thus,thefieldatthesurfaceofthewireis 0 r . For
2πa
the niobium wire, this field is
(4π×10 −7 T m/A)(300A)
B= =0.24T.
2π ⎛ 2.5×10−4 m ⎞
⎝ ⎠
Since this exceeds the critical 0.16 T, the wire does not remain superconducting.
Significance
Superconductivityrequireslowtemperaturesandlowmagneticfields.Thesesimultaneousconditionsaremetless
easilyforNbthanformanyothermetals.Forexample,aluminumsuperconductsattemperatures7timeslower
and magnetic fields 18 times lower.
9.6 Check Your UnderstandingWhat conditions are necessary for superconductivity?
Theory of Superconductors
A successful theory of superconductivity was developed in the 1950s by John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and J. Robert
Schrieffer, for which they received the Nobel Prize in 1972. This theory is known as the BCS theory. BCS theory is
complex, so we summarize it qualitatively below.
Inanormalconductor,theelectricalpropertiesofthematerialareduetothemostenergeticelectronsneartheFermienergy.
In1956,CoopershowedthatifthereisanyattractiveinteractionbetweentwoelectronsattheFermilevel,thentheelectrons
can form a bound state in which their total energy is less than 2E . Two such electrons are known as aCooper pair.
F
Itishardtoimaginetwoelectronsattractingeachother,sincetheyhavelikechargeandshouldrepel.However,theproposed
interactionoccursonlyinthecontextofanatomiclattice.AdepictionoftheattractionisshowninFigure9.32.Electron
1slightlydisplacesthepositivelychargedatomicnucleitowarditselfasittravelspastbecauseoftheCoulombattraction.
Electron2“sees”aregionwithahigherdensityofpositivechargerelativetothesurroundingsandisthereforeattractedinto
this region and, therefore indirectly, to electron 1. Because of the exclusion principle, the two electrons of a Cooper pair
must have opposite spin.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 9 | Condensed Matter Physics 441
Figure 9.32 A Cooper pair can form as a result of the
displacement of positive atomic nuclei. Electron 1 slightly
displaces the positively charged atomic nuclei toward itself as it
travels past because of the Coulomb attraction. Electron 2 “sees”
a region with a higher density of positive charge relative to the
surroundings and is therefore attracted into this region.
TheBCStheoryextendsCooper’sideas,whichareforasinglepairofelectrons,totheentirefreeelectrongas.Whenthe
transitiontothesuperconductingstateoccurs,alltheelectronspairuptoformCooperpairs.Onanatomicscale,thedistance
betweenthetwoelectronsmakingupaCooperpairisquitelarge.Betweentheseelectronsaretypicallyabout 10 6 other
electrons, each also pairs with a distant electron. Hence, there is considerable overlap between the wave functions of the
individualCooperpairs,resultinginastrongcorrelationamongthemotionsofthepairs.Theyallmovetogether“instep,”
likethemembersofamarchingband.Inthesuperconductingtransition,thedensityofstatesbecomesdrasticallychanged
neartheFermilevel.AsshowninFigure9.33,anenergygapappearsaround E becausethecollectionofCooperpairs
F
haslowergroundstateenergythantheFermigasofnoninteractingelectrons.Theappearanceofthisgapcharacterizesthe
superconductingstate.Ifthisstateisdestroyed,thenthegapdisappears,andthedensityofstatesrevertstothatofthefree
electron gas.
Figure 9.33 A relatively large energy gap is formed around
the Fermi energy when a material becomes superconducting. If
this state is destroyed, then the gap disappears, and the density
of states reverts to that of the free electron gas.