# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 672-678
############################################################

660 14 • Fluid Mechanics
surface of a fluid. The molecules of the fluid simply flow to accommodate the horizontal force. A force applied
perpendicular to the surface compresses or expands the fluid. If you try to compress a fluid, you find that a reaction
force develops at each point inside the fluid in the outward direction, balancing the force applied on the molecules
at the boundary.
Consider a fluid of constant density as shown in Figure 14.6. The pressure at the bottom of the container is due to
the pressure of the atmosphere plus the pressure due to the weight of the fluid. The pressure due to the fluid is
equal to the weight of the fluid divided by the area. The weight of the fluid is equal to its mass times the acceleration
due to gravity.
FIGURE 14.6 The bottom of this container supports the entire weight of the fluid in it. The vertical sides cannot exert an upward force on
the fluid (since it cannot withstand a shearing force), so the bottom must support it all.
Since the density is constant, the weight can be calculated using the density:
The pressure at the bottom of the container is therefore equal to atmospheric pressure added to the weight of the
fluid divided by the area:
This equation is only good for pressure at a depth for a fluid of constant density.
PRESSURE AT A DEPTH FOR A FLUID OF CONSTANT DENSITY
The pressure at a depth in a fluid of constant density is equal to the pressure of the atmosphere plus the
pressure due to the weight of the fluid, or
14.4
Where p is the pressure at a particular depth, is the pressure of the atmosphere, is the density of the fluid, g
is the acceleration due to gravity, and h is the depth.
FIGURE 14.7 The Three Gorges Dam, erected on the Yangtze River in central China in 2008, created a massive reservoir that displaced
Access for free at openstax.org

14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 661
more than one million people. (credit: modification of work by “Le Grand Portage”/Flickr)
EXAMPLE 14.1
What Force Must a Dam Withstand?
Consider the pressure and force acting on the dam retaining a reservoir of water (Figure 14.7). Suppose the dam is
500-m wide and the water is 80.0-m deep at the dam, as illustrated below. (a) What is the average pressure on the
dam due to the water? (b) Calculate the force exerted against the dam.
The average pressure p due to the weight of the water is the pressure at the average depth h of 40.0 m, since
pressure increases linearly with depth. The force exerted on the dam by the water is the average pressure times the
area of contact,
solution
a. The average pressure due to the weight of a fluid is
14.5
Entering the density of water from Table 14.2 and taking h to be the average depth of 40.0 m, we obtain
b. We have already found the value for p. The area of the dam is
so that
Significance
Although this force seems large, it is small compared with the weight of the water in the reservoir. In
fact, it is only 0.0800% of the weight.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.1
If the reservoir in Example 14.1 covered twice the area, but was kept to the same depth, would the dam need to be
redesigned?
Pressure in a static fluid in a uniform gravitational field
A static fluid is a fluid that is not in motion. At any point within a static fluid, the pressure on all sides must be
equal—otherwise, the fluid at that point would react to a net force and accelerate.

662 14 • Fluid Mechanics
The pressure at any point in a static fluid depends only on the depth at that point. As discussed, pressure in a fluid
near Earth varies with depth due to the weight of fluid above a particular level. In the above examples, we assumed
density to be constant and the average density of the fluid to be a good representation of the density. This is a
reasonable approximation for liquids like water, where large forces are required to compress the liquid or change
the volume. In a swimming pool, for example, the density is approximately constant, and the water at the bottom is
compressed very little by the weight of the water on top. Traveling up in the atmosphere is quite a different
situation, however. The density of the air begins to change significantly just a short distance above Earth’s surface.
To derive a formula for the variation of pressure with depth in a tank containing a fluid of density ρ on the surface of
Earth, we must start with the assumption that the density of the fluid is not constant. Fluid located at deeper levels
is subjected to more force than fluid nearer to the surface due to the weight of the fluid above it. Therefore, the
pressure calculated at a given depth is different than the pressure calculated using a constant density.
Imagine a thin element of fluid at a depth h, as shown in Figure 14.8. Let the element have a cross-sectional area A
and height . The forces acting upon the element are due to the pressures p(y) above and below it. The
weight of the element itself is also shown in the free-body diagram.
FIGURE 14.8 Forces on a mass element inside a fluid. The weight of the element itself is shown in the free-body diagram.
Since the element of fluid between y and is not accelerating, the forces are balanced. Using a Cartesian
y-axis oriented up, we find the following equation for the y-component:
14.6
Note that if the element had a non-zero y-component of acceleration, the right-hand side would not be zero but
would instead be the mass times the y-acceleration. The mass of the element can be written in terms of the density
of the fluid and the volume of the elements:
Putting this expression for into Equation 14.6 and then dividing both sides by , we find
14.7
Taking the limit of the infinitesimally thin element , we obtain the following differential equation, which
gives the variation of pressure in a fluid:
14.8
Access for free at openstax.org

14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 663
This equation tells us that the rate of change of pressure in a fluid is proportional to the density of the fluid. The
solution of this equation depends upon whether the density ρ is constant or changes with depth; that is, the function
ρ(y).
If the range of the depth being analyzed is not too great, we can assume the density to be constant. But if the range
of depth is large enough for the density to vary appreciably, such as in the case of the atmosphere, there is
significant change in density with depth. In that case, we cannot use the approximation of a constant density.
Pressure in a fluid with a constant density
Let’s use Equation 14.9 to work out a formula for the pressure at a depth h from the surface in a tank of a liquid such
as water, where the density of the liquid can be taken to be constant.
We need to integrate Equation 14.9 from where the pressure is atmospheric pressure to the
y-coordinate of the depth:
14.9
Hence, pressure at a depth of fluid on the surface of Earth is equal to the atmospheric pressure plus ρgh if the
density of the fluid is constant over the height, as we found previously.
Note that the pressure in a fluid depends only on the depth from the surface and not on the shape of the container.
Thus, in a container where a fluid can freely move in various parts, the liquid stays at the same level in every part,
regardless of the shape, as shown in Figure 14.9.
FIGURE 14.9 If a fluid can flow freely between parts of a container, it rises to the same height in each part. In the container pictured, the
pressure at the bottom of each column is the same; if it were not the same, the fluid would flow until the pressures became equal.
Variation of atmospheric pressure with height
The change in atmospheric pressure with height is of particular interest. Assuming the temperature of air to be
constant, and that the ideal gas law of thermodynamics describes the atmosphere to a good approximation, we can
find the variation of atmospheric pressure with height, when the temperature is constant. (We discuss the ideal gas
law in a later chapter, but we assume you have some familiarity with it from high school and chemistry.) Let p(y) be
the atmospheric pressure at height y. The density at y, the temperature T in the Kelvin scale (K), and the mass m

664 14 • Fluid Mechanics
of a molecule of air are related to the absolute pressure by the ideal gas law, in the form
14.10
where is Boltzmann’s constant, which has a value of .
You may have encountered the ideal gas law in the form , where n is the number of moles and R is the
gas constant. Here, the same law has been written in a different form, using the density instead of volume V.
Therefore, if pressure p changes with height, so does the density Using density from the ideal gas law, the rate of
variation of pressure with height is given as
where constant quantities have been collected inside the parentheses. Replacing these constants with a single
symbol the equation looks much simpler:
This gives the solution
Thus, atmospheric pressure drops exponentially with height, since the y-axis is pointed up from the ground and y
has positive values in the atmosphere above sea level. The pressure drops by a factor of when the height is
which gives us a physical interpretation for : The constant is a length scale that characterizes how pressure
varies with height and is often referred to as the pressure scale height.
We can obtain an approximate value of by using the mass of a nitrogen molecule as a proxy for an air molecule. At
temperature or 300 K, we find
Therefore, for every 8800 meters, the air pressure drops by a factor 1/e, or approximately one-third of its value. This
gives us only a rough estimate of the actual situation, since we have assumed both a constant temperature and a
constant g over such great distances from Earth, neither of which is correct in reality.
Direction of pressure in a fluid
Fluid pressure has no direction, being a scalar quantity, whereas the forces due to pressure have well-defined
directions: They are always exerted perpendicular to any surface. The reason is that fluids cannot withstand or exert
shearing forces. Thus, in a static fluid enclosed in a tank, the force exerted on the walls of the tank is exerted
perpendicular to the inside surface. Likewise, pressure is exerted perpendicular to the surfaces of any object within
the fluid. Figure 14.10 illustrates the pressure exerted by air on the walls of a tire and by water on the body of a
swimmer.
Access for free at openstax.org

14.2 • Measuring Pressure 665
FIGURE 14.10 (a) Pressure inside this tire exerts forces perpendicular to all surfaces it contacts. The arrows represent directions and
magnitudes of the forces exerted at various points. (b) Pressure is exerted perpendicular to all sides of this swimmer, since the water would
flow into the space he occupies if he were not there. The arrows represent the directions and magnitudes of the forces exerted at various
points on the swimmer. Note that the forces are larger underneath, due to greater depth, giving a net upward or buoyant force. The net
vertical force on the swimmer is equal to the sum of the buoyant force and the weight of the swimmer.
14.2 Measuring Pressure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define gauge pressure and absolute pressure
• Explain various methods for measuring pressure
• Understand the working of open-tube barometers
• Describe in detail how manometers and barometers operate
In the preceding section, we derived a formula for calculating the variation in pressure for a fluid in hydrostatic
equilibrium. As it turns out, this is a very useful calculation. Measurements of pressure are important in daily life as
well as in science and engineering applications. In this section, we discuss different ways that pressure can be
reported and measured.
Gauge Pressure vs. Absolute Pressure
Suppose the pressure gauge on a full scuba tank reads 3000 psi, which is approximately 207 atmospheres. When
the valve is opened, air begins to escape because the pressure inside the tank is greater than the atmospheric
pressure outside the tank. Air continues to escape from the tank until the pressure inside the tank equals the
pressure of the atmosphere outside the tank. At this point, the pressure gauge on the tank reads zero, even though
the pressure inside the tank is actually 1 atmosphere—the same as the air pressure outside the tank.
Most pressure gauges, like the one on the scuba tank, are calibrated to read zero at atmospheric pressure. Pressure
readings from such gauges are called gauge pressure, which is the pressure relative to the atmospheric pressure.
When the pressure inside the tank is greater than atmospheric pressure, the gauge reports a positive value.
Some gauges are designed to measure negative pressure. For example, many physics experiments must take place
in a vacuum chamber, a rigid chamber from which some of the air is pumped out. The pressure inside the vacuum
chamber is less than atmospheric pressure, so the pressure gauge on the chamber reads a negative value.
Unlike gauge pressure, absolute pressure accounts for atmospheric pressure, which in effect adds to the pressure
in any fluid not enclosed in a rigid container.
ABSOLUTE PRESSURE
The absolute pressure, or total pressure, is the sum of gauge pressure and atmospheric pressure:
14.11