# REAL PDF — openstax_vol2.pdf, pages 496-501
############################################################

486 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
57. If you wish to take a picture of a bullet traveling at
10.5RC Circuits 500m/s,thenaverybriefflashoflightproducedbyanRC
dischargethroughaflashtubecanlimitblurring.Assuming
49. The timing device in an automobile’s intermittent
1.00 mm of motion during one RC constant is acceptable,
wipersystemisbasedonanRCtimeconstantandutilizes
a 0.500-µF capacitor and a variable resistor. Over what
and given that the flash is driven by a 600-µF capacitor,
what is the resistance in the flash tube?
range must R be made to vary to achieve time constants
from 2.00 to 15.0 s?
10.6Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
50. Aheartpacemakerfires72timesaminute,eachtime
a25.0-nFcapacitorischarged(byabatteryinserieswitha 58. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short circuit
resistor)to0.632ofitsfullvoltage.Whatisthevalueofthe of 240-V ac through a resistance of 0.250Ω? (b) What
resistance? current flows?
51. The duration of a photographic flash is related to an 59. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short circuit
RCtimeconstant,whichis 0.100µF foracertaincamera. through a 0.100-Ω resistance?
(a) If the resistance of the flash lamp is 0.0400Ω during
discharge, what is the size of the capacitor supplying its 60. Find the current through a person and identify the
energy? (b) What is the time constant for charging the likelyeffectonherifshetouchesa120-Vacsource:(a)if
capacitor, if the charging resistance is 800kΩ? sheisstandingonarubbermatandoffersatotalresistance
of 300kΩ;(b)ifsheisstandingbarefootonwetgrassand
52. A 2.00- and a 7.50-µF capacitor can be connected has a resistance of only 4000kΩ.
inseriesorparallel,ascana25.0-anda 100-kΩ resistor.
61. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal case
Calculate the four RC time constants possible from
ofaradio.Thepaththroughthepersontothedrainpipeand
connecting the resulting capacitance and resistance in
series.
ground has a resistance of 4000Ω. What is the smallest
voltageonthecaseoftheradiothatcouldcauseventricular
fibrillation?
53. A 500-Ω resistor,anuncharged 1.50-µF capacitor,
and a 6.16-V emf are connected in series. (a) What is the
62. Amanfoolishlytriestofishaburningpieceofbread
initialcurrent?(b)WhatistheRCtimeconstant?(c)What
from a toaster with a metal butter knife and comes into
is the current after one time constant? (d) What is the
contact with 120-V ac. He does not even feel it since,
voltage on the capacitor after one time constant?
luckily, he is wearing rubber-soled shoes. What is the
minimumresistanceofthepaththecurrentfollowsthrough
54. A heart defibrillator being used on a patient has an
the person?
RC time constant of 10.0 ms due to the resistance of the
patient and the capacitance of the defibrillator. (a) If the
63. (a) During surgery, a current as small as 20.0µA
defibrillator has a capacitance of 8.00µF, what is the
applied directly to the heart may cause ventricular
resistanceofthepaththroughthepatient?(Youmayneglect
fibrillation. If the resistance of the exposed heart is
the capacitance of the patient and the resistance of the
300Ω, what is the smallest voltage that poses this
defibrillator.)(b)Iftheinitialvoltageis12.0kV,howlong
danger?(b)Doesyouranswerimplythatspecialelectrical
does it take to decline to 6.00×102 V?
safety precautions are needed?
55. AnECGmonitormusthaveanRCtimeconstantless
64. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V ac short circuit
than 1.00×102µs to be able to measure variations in that generates a peak power of 96.8 kW? (b) What would
voltage over small time intervals. (a) If the resistance of the average power be if the voltage were 120 V ac?
the circuit (due mostly to that of the patient’s chest) is
1.00kΩ,whatisthemaximumcapacitanceofthecircuit? 65. Aheartdefibrillatorpasses10.0Athroughapatient’s
(b)Woulditbedifficultinpracticetolimitthecapacitance torso for 5.00 ms in an attempt to restore normal beating.
to less than the value found in (a)? (a)Howmuchchargepassed?(b)Whatvoltagewasapplied
if500Jofenergywasdissipated?(c)Whatwasthepath’s
resistance?(d)Findthetemperatureincreasecausedinthe
56. Usingtheexactexponentialtreatment,determinehow
8.00 kg of affected tissue.
much time is required to charge an initially uncharged
100-pF capacitor through a 75.0-MΩ resistor to 90.0%
66. A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a
of its final voltage.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 487
0.500-Ω resistance. Calculate the temperature rise of the foracircuitbreakertointerruptthecurrent.Isthislikelyto
2.00 g of surrounding materials, assuming their specific be damaging?
heatcapacityis 0.200cal/g·°C andthatittakes0.0500s
ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS
67. AcircuitcontainsaDcellbattery,aswitch,a 20-Ω diameter. The resistivity of the graphite is
resistor,andfour20-mFcapacitorsconnectedinseries.(a) ρ=1.38×10 −5 Ω/m.Thehomemaderesistorisplacein
Whatistheequivalentcapacitanceofthecircuit?(b)What
series with a switch, a 10.00-mF capacitor and a 0.50-V
is the RC time constant? (c) How long before the current
power source. (a) What is the RC time constant of the
decreases to 50% of the initial value once the switch is
circuit?(b)Whatisthepotentialdropacrossthepencil1.00
closed? s after the switch is closed?
68. AcircuitcontainsaD-cellbattery,aswitch,a 20-Ω 72. Therathersimplecircuitshownbelowisknownasa
resistor, and three 20-mF capacitors. The capacitors are voltage divider. The symbol consisting of three horizontal
connected in parallel, and the parallel connection of linesisrepresents“ground”andcanbedefinedasthepoint
capacitors are connected in series with the switch, the where the potential is zero. The voltage divider is widely
resistor and the battery. (a) What is the equivalent used in circuits and a single voltage source can be used
capacitance of the circuit? (b) What is the RC time to provide reduced voltage to a load resistor as shown
constant? (c) How long before the current decreases to in the second part of the figure. (a) What is the output
50% of the initial value once the switch is closed? voltage V ofcircuit(a)intermsof R , R , andV ?
out 1 2 in
(b)Whatistheoutputvoltage V ofcircuit(b)interms
out
69. Considerthecircuitbelow.Thebatteryhasanemfof
ε=30.00V andaninternalresistanceof r =1.00Ω. (a)
of R
1
, R
2
, R L, andV
in
?
Findtheequivalentresistanceofthecircuitandthecurrent
outofthebattery.(b)Findthecurrentthrougheachresistor.
(c)Findthepotentialdropacrosseachresistor.(d)Findthe
powerdissipatedbyeachresistor.(e)Findthetotalpower
supplied by the batteries.
73. Three 300-Ω resistors are connect in series with an
AAA battery with a rating of 3 AmpHours. (a) How long
can the battery supply the resistors with power? (b) If the
resistorsareconnectedinparallel,howlongcanthebattery
last?
74. Consider a circuit that consists of a real battery with
70. A homemade capacitor is constructed of 2 sheets of
an emf ε and an internal resistance of r connected to a
aluminumfoilwithanareaof2.00squaremeters,separated
variableresistorR.(a)Inorderfortheterminal voltageof
bypaper,0.05mmthick,ofthesameareaandadielectric
thebatterytobeequaltotheemfofthebattery,whatshould
constant of 3.7. The homemade capacitor is connected in
theresistanceofthevariableresistorbeadjustedto?(b)In
series with a 100.00-Ω resistor, a switch, and a 6.00-V
order to get the maximum current from the battery, what
voltage source. (a) What is the RC time constant of the
shouldtheresistancevariableresistorbeadjustedto?(c)In
circuit? (b) What is the initial current through the circuit,
order for the maximum power output of the battery to be
when the switch is closed? (c) How long does it take the
reached,whatshouldtheresistanceofthevariableresistor
current to reach one third of its initial value?
be set to?
71. Astudentmakesahomemaderesistorfromagraphite
75. Considerthecircuitshownbelow.Whatistheenergy
pencil 5.00 cm long, where the graphite is 0.05 mm in

488 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
storedineachcapacitoraftertheswitchhasbeenclosedfor
a very long time?
76. Consideracircuitconsistingofabatterywithanemf
ε and an internal resistance of r connected in series with
a resistor R and a capacitor C. Show that the total energy
80. Two resistors, one having a resistance of 145Ω,
suppliedbythebatterywhilechargingthebatteryisequal are connected in parallel to produce a total resistance of
to ε2C. 150Ω. (a) What is the value of the second resistance?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
77. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal
voltagesofthebatteriesareshown.(a)Findtheequivalent
resistance of the circuit and the current out of the battery. 81. Two resistors, one having a resistance of 900kΩ,
(b) Find the current through each resistor. (c) Find the are connected in series to produce a total resistance of
potential drop across each resistor. (d) Find the power 0.500MΩ.(a)Whatisthevalueofthesecondresistance?
dissipatedbyeachresistor.(e)Findthetotalpowersupplied (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
by the batteries. assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
82. Apply the junction rule at pointashown below.
78. Consider the circuit shown below. (a) What is the
terminal voltage of the battery? (b) What is the potential
drop across resistor R ?
2
83. ApplytheloopruletoLoopakledcbainthepreceding
problem.
79. Consider the circuit shown below. (a)Determine the
equivalentresistanceandthecurrentfromthebatterywith 84. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in the
switch S open. (b) Determine the equivalent resistance preceding problem. Explicitly show how you follow the
1
steps in the Problem-Solving Strategy: Series and
and the current from the battery with switch S closed.
1 Parallel Resistors.
85. Considerthecircuitshownbelow.(a)Findthecurrent
through each resistor. (b) Check the calculations by
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9

Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits 489
analyzing the power in the circuit. producesanaverage 0.500Wfromanaverage 3.00V.(a)
Whatenergydoesitdissipate?(b)Howmuchchargemoves
through the lamp? (c) Find the capacitance. (d) What is
theresistanceofthelamp?(Sinceaveragevaluesaregiven
for some quantities, the shape of the pulse profile is not
needed.)
87. A 160-µF capacitor charged to 450 V is discharged
througha 31.2-kΩ resistor.(a)Findthetimeconstant.(b)
Calculatethetemperatureincreaseoftheresistor,giventhat
itsmassis2.50ganditsspecificheatis 1.67kJ/kg·°C,
noting that most of the thermal energy is retained in the
short time of the discharge. (c) Calculate the new
86. A flashing lamp in a Christmas earring is based on
resistance,assumingitispurecarbon.(d)Doesthischange
an RC discharge of a capacitor through its resistance. The
in resistance seem significant?
effective duration of the flash is 0.250 s, during which it
CHALLENGE PROBLEMS
88. Some camera flashes use flash tubes that require a
high voltage. They obtain a high voltage by charging
capacitors in parallel and then internally changing the
connections of the capacitors to place them in series.
Consider a circuit that uses four AAA batteries connected
in series to charge six 10-mF capacitors through an
equivalent resistance of 100Ω. The connections are then
switched internally to place the capacitors in series. The
capacitors discharge through a lamp with a resistance of
100Ω. (a) What is the RC time constant and the initial
current out of the batteries while they are connected in
parallel? (b) How long does it take for the capacitors to
charge to 90% of the terminal voltages of the batteries?
(c) What is the RC time constant and the initial current of
thecapacitorsconnectedinseriesassumingitdischargesat
90% offullcharge?(d)Howlongdoesittakethecurrent
to decrease to 10% of the initial value?
89. Considerthecircuitshownbelow.Eachbatteryhasan
emf of 1.50 V and an internal resistance of 1.00Ω. (a) 90. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which essentially
Whatisthecurrentthroughtheexternalresistor,whichhas consists of a coil of wire with a small resistance and a
aresistanceof10.00ohms?(b)Whatistheterminalvoltage pointer with a scale attached. When current runs through
of each battery? the coil, the pointer turns; the amount the pointer turns
is proportional to the amount of current running through
the coil. Galvanometers can be used to make an ammeter
if a resistor is placed in parallel with the galvanometer.
Consideragalvanometerthathasaresistanceof 25.00Ω
andgivesafullscalereadingwhena 50-µA currentruns
through it. The galvanometer is to be used to make an
ammeterthathasafullscalereadingof10.00A,asshown
below. Recall that an ammeter is connected in series with
the circuit of interest, so all 10 A must run through the
meter. (a) What is the current through the parallel resistor
in the meter? (b) What is the voltage across the parallel
resistor? (c) What is the resistance of the parallel resistor?

490 Chapter 10 | Direct-Current Circuits
I , V , I , andV .
1 1 2 3
93. Consider the circuit below. (a) What is the RC time
constantofthecircuit?(b)Whatistheinitialcurrentinthe
circuitoncetheswitchisclosed?(c)Howmuchtimepasses
91. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which essentially between the instant the switch is closed and the time the
consists of a coil of wire with a small resistance and a current has reached half of the initial current?
pointer with a scale attached. When current runs through
the coil, the point turns; the amount the pointer turns is
proportional to the amount of current running through the
coil. Galvanometers can be used to make a voltmeter if a
resistorisplacedinserieswiththegalvanometer.Consider
agalvanometerthathasaresistanceof 25.00Ω andgives
afullscalereadingwhena 50-µA currentrunsthroughit.
The galvanometer is to be used to make an voltmeter that
hasafullscalereadingof10.00V,asshownbelow.Recall
thatavoltmeterisconnectedinparallelwiththecomponent
of interest, so the meter must have a high resistance or it
willchangethecurrentrunningthroughthecomponent.(a)
What is the potential drop across the series resistor in the
meter? (b) What is the resistance of the parallel resistor?
94. Consider the circuit below. (a) What is the initial
currentthroughresistor R whentheswitchisclosed?(b)
2
Whatisthecurrentthroughresistor R whenthecapacitor
2
is fully charged, long after the switch is closed? (c) What
happens if the switch is opened after it has been closed
for some time? (d) If the switch has been closed for a
timeperiodlongenoughforthecapacitor tobecomefully
charged,andthentheswitchisopened,howlongbeforethe
currentthroughresistor R reacheshalfofitsinitialvalue?
1
92. Consider the circuit shown below. Find
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12074/1.9