# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 140-148
############################################################

128 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
One-Dimensional Motion Involving Gravity
The best way to see the basic features of motion involving gravity is to start with the simplest situations and then
progress toward more complex ones. So, we start by considering straight up-and-down motion with no air
resistance or friction. These assumptions mean the velocity (if there is any) is vertical. If an object is dropped, we
know the initial velocity is zero when in free fall. When the object has left contact with whatever held or threw it, the
object is in free fall. When the object is thrown, it has the same initial speed in free fall as it did before it was
released. When the object comes in contact with the ground or any other object, it is no longer in free fall and its
acceleration of g is no longer valid. Under these circumstances, the motion is one-dimensional and has constant
acceleration of magnitude g. We represent vertical displacement with the symbol y.
KINEMATIC EQUATIONS FOR OBJECTS IN FREE FALL
We assume here that acceleration equals −g (with the positive direction upward).
3.15
​
3.16
3.17
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Free Fall
1. Decide on the sign of the acceleration of gravity. In Equation 3.15 through Equation 3.17, acceleration g is
negative, which says the positive direction is upward and the negative direction is downward. In some
problems, it may be useful to have acceleration g as positive, indicating the positive direction is downward.
2. Draw a sketch of the problem. This helps visualize the physics involved.
3. Record the knowns and unknowns from the problem description. This helps devise a strategy for selecting the
appropriate equations to solve the problem.
4. Decide which of Equation 3.15 through Equation 3.17 are to be used to solve for the unknowns.
EXAMPLE 3.14
Free Fall of a Ball
Figure 3.27 shows the positions of a ball, at 1-s intervals, with an initial velocity of 4.9 m/s downward, that is thrown
from the top of a 98-m-high building. (a) How much time elapses before the ball reaches the ground? (b) What is the
velocity when it arrives at the ground?
Access for free at openstax.org

3.5 • Free Fall 129
FIGURE 3.27 The positions and velocities at 1-s intervals of a ball thrown downward from a tall building at 4.9 m/s.
Strategy
Choose the origin at the top of the building with the positive direction upward and the negative direction downward.
To find the time when the position is −98 m, we use Equation 3.16, with .
Solution
a. Substitute the given values into the equation:
This simplifies to
This is a quadratic equation with roots . The positive root is the one we are interested
in, since time is the time when the ball is released at the top of the building. (The time
represents the fact that a ball thrown upward from the ground would have been in the air for 5.0 s when it
passed by the top of the building moving downward at 4.9 m/s.)
b. Using Equation 3.15, we have
Significance
For situations when two roots are obtained from a quadratic equation in the time variable, we must look at the
physical significance of both roots to determine which is correct. Since corresponds to the time when the ball
was released, the negative root would correspond to a time before the ball was released, which is not physically
meaningful. When the ball hits the ground, its velocity is not immediately zero, but as soon as the ball interacts with
the ground, its acceleration is not g and it accelerates with a different value over a short time to zero velocity. This
problem shows how important it is to establish the correct coordinate system and to keep the signs of g in the
kinematic equations consistent.
EXAMPLE 3.15
Vertical Motion of a Baseball
A batter hits a baseball straight upward at home plate and the ball is caught 5.0 s after it is struck (Figure 3.28). (a)
What is the initial velocity of the ball? (b) What is the maximum height the ball reaches? (c) How long does it take to
reach the maximum height? (d) What is the acceleration at the top of its path? (e) What is the velocity of the ball

130 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
when it is caught? Assume the ball is hit and caught at the same location.
FIGURE 3.28 A baseball hit straight up is caught by the catcher 5.0 s later.
Strategy
Choose a coordinate system with a positive y-axis that is straight up and with an origin that is at the spot where the
ball is hit and caught.
Solution
a. Equation 3.16 gives
which gives .
b. At the maximum height, . With , Equation 3.17 gives
or
c. To find the time when , we use Equation 3.15:
This gives . Since the ball rises for 2.5 s, the time to fall is 2.5 s.
d. The acceleration is 9.8 m/s2 everywhere, even when the velocity is zero at the top of the path. Although the
velocity is zero at the top, it is changing at the rate of 9.8 m/s2 downward.
e. The velocity at can be determined with Equation 3.15:
Significance
The ball returns with the speed it had when it left. This is a general property of free fall for any initial velocity. We
used a single equation to go from throw to catch, and did not have to break the motion into two segments, upward
Access for free at openstax.org

3.5 • Free Fall 131
and downward. We are used to thinking that the effect of gravity is to create free fall downward toward Earth. It is
important to understand, as illustrated in this example, that objects moving upward away from Earth are also in a
state of free fall.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.7
A chunk of ice breaks off a glacier and falls 30.0 m before it hits the water. Assuming it falls freely (there is no air
resistance), how long does it take to hit the water? Which quantity increases faster, the speed of the ice chunk or its
distance traveled?
EXAMPLE 3.16
Rocket Booster
A small rocket with a booster blasts off and heads straight upward. When at a height of and velocity of 200.0
m/s, it releases its booster. (a) What is the maximum height the booster attains? (b) What is the velocity of the
booster at a height of 6.0 km? Neglect air resistance.
FIGURE 3.29 A rocket releases its booster at a given height and velocity. How high and how fast does the booster go?
Strategy
We need to select the coordinate system for the acceleration of gravity, which we take as negative downward. We
are given the initial velocity of the booster and its height. We consider the point of release as the origin. We know the
velocity is zero at the maximum position within the acceleration interval; thus, the velocity of the booster is zero at
its maximum height, so we can use this information as well. From these observations, we use Equation 3.17, which
gives us the maximum height of the booster. We also use Equation 3.17 to give the velocity at 6.0 km. The initial
velocity of the booster is 200.0 m/s.

132 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Solution
a. From Equation 3.17, . With , we can solve for y:
This solution gives the maximum height of the booster in our coordinate system, which has its origin at the
point of release, so the maximum height of the booster is roughly 7.0 km.
b. An altitude of 6.0 km corresponds to in the coordinate system we are using. The other initial
conditions are .
We have, from Equation 3.17,
Significance
We have both a positive and negative solution in (b). Since our coordinate system has the positive direction upward,
the +142.8 m/s corresponds to a positive upward velocity at 6000 m during the upward leg of the trajectory of the
booster. The value v = −142.8 m/s corresponds to the velocity at 6000 m on the downward leg. This example is also
important in that an object is given an initial velocity at the origin of our coordinate system, but the origin is at an
altitude above the surface of Earth, which must be taken into account when forming the solution.
INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation below to learn about graphing polynomials. The shape of the curve changes as the
constants are adjusted. View the curves for the individual terms (for example, y = bx) to see how they add to
generate the polynomial curve.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21equatgraph)
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive the kinematic equations for constant acceleration using integral calculus.
• Use the integral formulation of the kinematic equations in analyzing motion.
• Find the functional form of velocity versus time given the acceleration function.
• Find the functional form of position versus time given the velocity function.
This section assumes you have enough background in calculus to be familiar with integration. In Instantaneous
Velocity and Speed and Average and Instantaneous Acceleration we introduced the kinematic functions of velocity
and acceleration using the derivative. By taking the derivative of the position function we found the velocity function,
and likewise by taking the derivative of the velocity function we found the acceleration function. Using integral
calculus, we can work backward and calculate the velocity function from the acceleration function, and the position
function from the velocity function.
Kinematic Equations from Integral Calculus
Let’s begin with a particle with an acceleration a(t) which is a known function of time. Since the time derivative of the
velocity function is acceleration,
we can take the indefinite integral of both sides, finding
Access for free at openstax.org

3.6 • Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration 133
where C1 is a constant of integration. Since , the velocity is given by
3.18
Similarly, the time derivative of the position function is the velocity function,
Thus, we can use the same mathematical manipulations we just used and find
3.19
where C2 is a second constant of integration.
We can derive the kinematic equations for a constant acceleration using these integrals. With a(t) = a a constant,
and doing the integration in Equation 3.18, we find
If the initial velocity is v(0) = v0, then
Then, C1 = v0 and
which is Equation 3.12. Substituting this expression into Equation 3.19 gives
Doing the integration, we find
If x(0) = x0, we have
so, C2 = x0. Substituting back into the equation for x(t), we finally have
which is Equation 3.13.
EXAMPLE 3.17
Motion of a Motorboat
A motorboat is traveling at a constant velocity of 5.0 m/s when it starts to accelerate opposite to the motion to arrive
at the dock. Its acceleration is . (a) What is the velocity function of the motorboat? (b) At what time
does the velocity reach zero? (c) What is the position function of the motorboat? (d) What is the displacement of the
motorboat from the time it begins to accelerate opposite to the motion to when the velocity is zero? (e) Graph the
velocity and position functions.

134 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Strategy
(a) To get the velocity function we must integrate and use initial conditions to find the constant of integration. (b) We
set the velocity function equal to zero and solve for t. (c) Similarly, we must integrate to find the position function
and use initial conditions to find the constant of integration. (d) Since the initial position is taken to be zero, we only
have to evaluate the position function at the time when the velocity is zero.
Solution
We take t = 0 to be the time when the boat starts to accelerate opposite to the motion.
a. From the functional form of the acceleration we can solve Equation 3.18 to get v(t):
At t = 0 we have v(0) = 5.0 m/s = 0 + C1, so C1 = 5.0 m/s or .
b.
c. Solve Equation 3.19:
At t = 0, we set x(0) = 0 = x0, since we are only interested in the displacement from when the boat starts to
accelerate opposite to the motion. We have
Therefore, the equation for the position is
d. Since the initial position is taken to be zero, we only have to evaluate the position function at the time when
the velocity is zero. This occurs at t = 6.3 s. Therefore, the displacement is
FIGURE 3.30 (a) Velocity of the motorboat as a function of time. The motorboat decreases its velocity to zero in 6.3 s. At times greater than
this, velocity becomes negative—meaning, the boat is reversing direction. (b) Position of the motorboat as a function of time. At t = 6.3 s,
the velocity is zero and the boat has stopped. At times greater than this, the velocity becomes negative—meaning, if the boat continues to
move with the same acceleration, it reverses direction and heads back toward where it originated.
Access for free at openstax.org

3.6 • Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration 135
Significance
The acceleration function is linear in time so the integration involves simple polynomials. In Figure 3.30, we see that
if we extend the solution beyond the point when the velocity is zero, the velocity becomes negative and the boat
reverses direction. This tells us that solutions can give us information outside our immediate interest and we should
be careful when interpreting them.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.8
A particle starts from rest and has an acceleration function . (a) What is the velocity
function? (b) What is the position function? (c) When is the velocity zero?