# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 518-523
############################################################

506 10 • Chapter Review
merry-go-round at a distance of 3.0 m from its forearm is , what is the rotational
axis of rotation. The merry-go-round accelerates kinetic energy of the forearm?
from rest up to 0.4 rev/s in 10 s. If the
58 . A diver goes into a somersault during a dive by
coefficient of static friction between the child
tucking her limbs. If her rotational kinetic energy
and the surface of the merry-go-round is 0.6,
is 100 J and her moment of inertia in the tuck is
does the child fall off before 5 s?
, what is her rotational rate during
52 . A bicycle wheel with radius 0.3 m rotates from the somersault?
rest to 3 rev/s in 5 s. What is the magnitude and
59 . An aircraft is coming in for a landing at 300
direction of the total acceleration vector at the
meters height when the propeller falls off. The
edge of the wheel at 1.0 s?
aircraft is flying at 40.0 m/s horizontally. The
53 . The angular velocity of a flywheel with radius 1.0 propeller has a rotation rate of 20 rev/s, a
m varies according to . Plot moment of inertia of , and a mass of
from for . 200 kg. Neglect air resistance so the rotation
Analyze these results to explain when rate does not change as the propeller falls. (a)
and when for a point on the flywheel at With what translational velocity does the
a radius of 1.0 m. propeller hit the ground? (b) What is the rotation
rate of the propeller at impact?
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
60 . An aircraft is coming in for a landing at 300
54 . A system of point particles is shown in the
meters height when the propeller falls off. When
following figure. Each particle has mass 0.3 kg
it comes off, the propeller has a rotation rate of
and they all lie in the same plane. (a) What is the
20 rev/s, a moment of inertia of , and
moment of inertia of the system about the given
a mass of 200 kg. If air resistance is present and
axis? (b) If the system rotates at 5 rev/s, what is
reduces the propeller’s rotational kinetic energy
its rotational kinetic energy?
at impact by 30%, what is the propeller’s
rotation rate at impact?
61 . A neutron star of mass and radius
10 km rotates with a period of 0.02 seconds.
What is its rotational kinetic energy?
62 . An electric sander consisting of a rotating disk of
mass 0.7 kg and radius 10 cm rotates at 15 rev/
s. When applied to a rough wooden wall the
rotation rate decreases by 20%. (a) What is the
final rotational kinetic energy of the rotating
disk? (b) How much has its rotational kinetic
energy decreased?
55 . (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy of
63 . A system consists of a disk of mass 2.0 kg and
Earth on its axis. (b) What is the rotational
radius 50 cm upon which is mounted an annular
kinetic energy of Earth in its orbit around the
cylinder of mass 1.0 kg with inner radius 20 cm
Sun?
and outer radius 30 cm (see below). The system
56 . Calculate the rotational kinetic energy of a 12-kg rotates about an axis through the center of the
motorcycle wheel if its angular velocity is 120 disk and annular cylinder at 10 rev/s. (a) What is
rad/s and its inner radius is 0.280 m and outer the moment of inertia of the system? (b) What is
radius 0.330 m. its rotational kinetic energy?
57 . A baseball pitcher throws the ball in a motion
where there is rotation of the forearm about the
elbow joint as well as other movements. If the
linear velocity of the ball relative to the elbow
joint is 20.0 m/s at a distance of 0.480 m from
the joint and the moment of inertia of the
Access for free at openstax.org

10 • Chapter Review 507
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
64 . While punting a football, a kicker rotates their
leg about the hip joint. The moment of inertia of 69 . A solid sphere of radius 10 cm is allowed to rotate
freely about an axis. The sphere is given a sharp
the leg is and its rotational kinetic
blow so that its center of mass starts from the
energy is 175 J. (a) What is the angular velocity
position shown in the following figure with speed 15
of the leg? (b) What is the velocity of tip of the
cm/s. What is the maximum angle that the diameter
punter’s shoe if it is 1.05 m from the hip joint?
makes with the vertical?
65 . Using the parallel axis theorem, what is the moment
of inertia of the rod of mass m about the axis shown
below?
70 . Calculate the moment of inertia by direct integration
of a thin rod of mass M and length L about an axis
through the rod at L/3, as shown below. Check your
66 . Find the moment of inertia of the rod in the
answer with the parallel-axis theorem.
previous problem by direct integration.
67 . A uniform rod of mass 1.0 kg and length 2.0 m is
free to rotate about one end (see the following
figure). If the rod is released from rest at an
angle of with respect to the horizontal, what 10.6 Torque
is the speed of the tip of the rod as it passes the
71 . Two flywheels of negligible mass and different radii
horizontal position?
are bonded together and rotate about a common
axis (see below). The smaller flywheel of radius 30
cm has a cord that has a pulling force of 50 N on it.
What pulling force needs to be applied to the cord
connecting the larger flywheel of radius 50 cm such
that the combination does not rotate?
68 . A pendulum consists of a rod of mass 2 kg and
length 1 m with a solid sphere at one end with
mass 0.3 kg and radius 20 cm (see the following
figure). If the pendulum is released from rest at
an angle of , what is the angular velocity at
the lowest point?

508 10 • Chapter Review
72 . The cylinder head bolts on a car are to be
tightened with a torque of 62.0 N . If a
mechanic uses a wrench of length 20 cm, what
perpendicular force must he exert on the end of
the wrench to tighten a bolt correctly?
73 . (a) When opening a door, you push on it
perpendicularly with a force of 55.0 N at a
distance of 0.850 m from the hinges. What
torque are you exerting relative to the hinges?
(b) Does it matter if you push at the same height
as the hinges? There is only one pair of hinges.
74 . When tightening a bolt, you push
perpendicularly on a wrench with a force of 165
N at a distance of 0.140 m from the center of the
78 . A seesaw has length 10.0 m and uniform mass 10.0
bolt. How much torque are you exerting in
kg and is resting at an angle of with respect to
newton-meters (relative to the center of the
the ground (see the following figure). The pivot is
bolt)?
located at 6.0 m. What magnitude of force needs to
75 . What hanging mass must be placed on the cord be applied perpendicular to the seesaw at the raised
to keep the pulley from rotating (see the end so as to allow the seesaw to barely start to
following figure)? The mass on the frictionless rotate?
plane is 5.0 kg. The mass on the plane is
connected to a cord that wraps around the
pulley’s inner radius of 20 cm. The hanging mass
is connected to a cord that wraps around the
pulley’s outer radius of 30 cm.
79 . A pendulum consists of a rod of mass 1 kg and
length 1 m connected to a pivot with a solid
sphere attached at the other end with mass 0.5
kg and radius 30 cm. What is the torque about
the pivot when the pendulum makes an angle of
76 . A simple pendulum consists of a massless tether
with respect to the vertical?
50 cm in length connected to a pivot and a small
mass of 1.0 kg attached at the other end. What
80 . A torque of is required to raise a
is the torque about the pivot when the pendulum
drawbridge (see the following figure). What is the
makes an angle of with respect to the
tension necessary to produce this torque? Would it
vertical?
be easier to raise the drawbridge if the angle were
77 . Calculate the torque about the z-axis that is out of larger or smaller?
the page at the origin in the following figure, given
that
.
Access for free at openstax.org

10 • Chapter Review 509
coefficient of friction between steel and stone is
0.20, calculate the angular acceleration of the
grindstone. (b) How many turns will the stone
make before coming to rest?
85 . Suppose you exert a force of 180 N tangential to
a 0.280-m-radius, 75.0-kg grindstone (a solid
disk). (a)What torque is exerted? (b) What is the
angular acceleration assuming negligible
opposing friction? (c) What is the angular
acceleration if there is an opposing frictional
force of 20.0 N exerted 1.50 cm from the axis?
86 . A flywheel ( ) starting from rest
acquires an angular velocity of 200.0 rad/s while
subject to a constant torque from a motor for 5
81 . A horizontal beam of length 3 m and mass 2.0 kg
s. (a) What is the angular acceleration of the
has a mass of 1.0 kg and width 0.2 m sitting at the
flywheel? (b) What is the magnitude of the
end of the beam (see the following figure). What is
torque?
the torque of the system about the support at the
wall? 87 . A constant torque is applied to a rigid body
whose moment of inertia is around
the axis of rotation. If the wheel starts from rest
and attains an angular velocity of 20.0 rad/s in
10.0 s, what is the applied torque?
88 . A torque of 50.0 N-m is applied to a grinding
wheel ( ) for 20 s. (a) If it starts
from rest, what is the angular velocity of the
grinding wheel after the torque is removed? (b)
Through what angle does the wheel move while
the torque is applied?
89 . A flywheel ( ) rotating at 500.0
rev/min is brought to rest by friction in 2.0 min.
What is the frictional torque on the flywheel?
90 . A uniform cylindrical grinding wheel of mass
50.0 kg and diameter 1.0 m is turned on by an
electric motor. The friction in the bearings is
negligible. (a) What torque must be applied to
82 . What force must be applied to end of a rod along the wheel to bring it from rest to 120 rev/min in
the x-axis of length 2.0 m in order to produce a 20 revolutions? (b) A tool whose coefficient of
torque on the rod about the origin of kinetic friction with the wheel is 0.60 is pressed
? perpendicularly against the wheel with a force of
40.0 N. What torque must be supplied by the
83 . What is the torque about the origin of the force
motor to keep the wheel rotating at a constant
if it is applied at the
angular velocity?
point whose position is:
91 . Suppose when Earth was created, it was not
rotating. However, after the application of a
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation uniform torque for 6 days according to the
current length of a day, it was rotating at 1 rev/
84 . You have a grindstone (a disk) that is 90.0 kg,
day. (a) What was the angular acceleration
has a 0.340-m radius, and is turning at 90.0
during the 6 days? (b) What torque was applied
rpm, and you press a steel axe against it with a
to Earth during this period? (c) What force
radial force of 20.0 N. (a) Assuming the kinetic
tangent to Earth at its equator would produce

510 10 • Chapter Review
this torque?
92 . A pulley of moment of inertia is mounted on a
wall as shown in the following figure. Light strings are
wrapped around two circumferences of the pulley and
weights are attached. What are (a) the angular
acceleration of the pulley and (b) the linear acceleration
of each weight? Assume the following data:
.
95 . A uniform rod of mass and length is held vertically
by two strings of negligible mass, as shown below.
(a) Immediately after the string is cut, what is the
linear acceleration of the free end of the stick? (b) Of
the middle of the stick?
93 . A block of mass 3 kg slides down an inclined
plane at an angle of with a massless tether 96 . A thin stick of mass 0.2 kg and length is
attached to a pulley with mass 1 kg and radius attached to the rim of a metal disk of mass
0.5 m at the top of the incline (see the following and radius . The stick is free
figure). The pulley can be approximated as a to rotate around a horizontal axis through its other
disk. The coefficient of kinetic friction on the end (see the following figure). (a) If the combination
plane is 0.4. What is the acceleration of the is released with the stick horizontal, what is the
block? speed of the center of the disk when the stick is
vertical? (b) What is the acceleration of the center of
the disk at the instant the stick is released? (c) At
the instant the stick passes through the vertical?
94 . The cart shown below moves across the table top as the
block falls. What is the acceleration of the cart? Neglect
friction and assume the following
data:
Access for free at openstax.org