# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 238-244
############################################################

226 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.26 The weight of a tightrope walker causes a wire to sag by . The system of interest is the point in the wire at which the
tightrope walker is standing.
Strategy
As you can see in Figure 5.26, the wire is bent under the person’s weight. Thus, the tension on either side of the
person has an upward component that can support his weight. As usual, forces are vectors represented pictorially
by arrows that have the same direction as the forces and lengths proportional to their magnitudes. The system is the
tightrope walker, and the only external forces acting on him are his weight and the two tensions (left tension)
and (right tension). It is reasonable to neglect the weight of the wire. The net external force is zero, because the
system is static. We can use trigonometry to find the tensions. One conclusion is possible at the outset—we can see
from Figure 5.26(b) that the magnitudes of the tensions and must be equal. We know this because there is
no horizontal acceleration in the rope and the only forces acting to the left and right are and . Thus, the
magnitude of those horizontal components of the forces must be equal so that they cancel each other out.
Whenever we have two-dimensional vector problems in which no two vectors are parallel, the easiest method of
solution is to pick a convenient coordinate system and project the vectors onto its axes. In this case, the best
coordinate system has one horizontal axis (x) and one vertical axis (y).
Solution
First, we need to resolve the tension vectors into their horizontal and vertical components. It helps to look at a new
free-body diagram showing all horizontal and vertical components of each force acting on the system (Figure 5.27).
FIGURE 5.27 When the vectors are projected onto vertical and horizontal axes, their components along these axes must add to zero, since
the tightrope walker is stationary. The small angle results in T being much greater than w.
Consider the horizontal components of the forces (denoted with a subscript x):
The net external horizontal force since the person is stationary. Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org

5.6 • Common Forces 227
Now observe Figure 5.27. You can use trigonometry to determine the magnitude of and :
Equating TLx and TRx:
Thus,
as predicted. Now, considering the vertical components (denoted by a subscript y), we can solve for T. Again, since
the person is stationary, Newton’s second law implies that . Thus, as illustrated in the free-body diagram,
We can use trigonometry to determine the relationships among and T. As we determined from the
analysis in the horizontal direction, :
Now we can substitute the vales for and , into the net force equation in the vertical direction:
and
so
and the tension is
Significance
The vertical tension in the wire acts as a force that supports the weight of the tightrope walker. The tension is almost
six times the 686-N weight of the tightrope walker. Since the wire is nearly horizontal, the vertical component of its
tension is only a fraction of the tension in the wire. The large horizontal components are in opposite directions and
cancel, so most of the tension in the wire is not used to support the weight of the tightrope walker.
If we wish to create a large tension, all we have to do is exert a force perpendicular to a taut flexible connector, as

228 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
illustrated in Figure 5.26. As we saw in Example 5.13, the weight of the tightrope walker acts as a force
perpendicular to the rope. We saw that the tension in the rope is related to the weight of the tightrope walker in the
following way:
We can extend this expression to describe the tension T created when a perpendicular force is exerted at the
middle of a flexible connector:
The angle between the horizontal and the bent connector is represented by . In this case, T becomes large as
approaches zero. Even the relatively small weight of any flexible connector will cause it to sag, since an infinite
tension would result if it were horizontal (i.e., and sin ). For example, Figure 5.28 shows a situation
where we wish to pull a car out of the mud when no tow truck is available. Each time the car moves forward, the
chain is tightened to keep it as straight as possible. The tension in the chain is given by and since is
small, T is large. This situation is analogous to the tightrope walker, except that the tensions shown here are those
transmitted to the car and the tree rather than those acting at the point where is applied.
FIGURE 5.28 We can create a large tension in the chain—and potentially a big mess—by pushing on it perpendicular to its length, as shown.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.9
One end of a 3.0-m rope is tied to a tree; the other end is tied to a car stuck in the mud. The motorist pulls sideways
on the midpoint of the rope, displacing it a distance of 0.25 m. If he exerts a force of 200.0 N under these
conditions, determine the force exerted on the car.
In Applications of Newton’s Laws, we extend the discussion on tension in a cable to include cases in which the
angles shown are not equal.
Friction
Friction is a resistive force opposing motion or its tendency. Imagine an object at rest on a horizontal surface. The
net force acting on the object must be zero, leading to equality of the weight and the normal force, which act in
opposite directions. If the surface is tilted, the normal force balances the component of the weight perpendicular to
the surface. If the object does not slide downward, the component of the weight parallel to the inclined plane is
balanced by friction. Friction is discussed in greater detail in the next chapter.
Spring force
A spring is a special medium with a specific atomic structure that has the ability to restore its shape, if deformed. To
restore its shape, a spring exerts a restoring force that is proportional to and in the opposite direction in which it is
stretched or compressed. This is the statement of a law known as Hooke’s law, which has the mathematical form
5.11
The constant of proportionality k is a measure of the spring’s stiffness. The line of action of this force is parallel to
the spring axis, and the sense of the force is in the opposite direction of the displacement vector (Figure 5.29). The
displacement must be measured from the relaxed position; when the spring is relaxed.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.6 • Common Forces 229
FIGURE 5.29 A spring exerts its force proportional to a displacement, whether it is compressed or stretched. (a) The spring is in a relaxed
position and exerts no force on the block. (b) The spring is compressed by displacement of the object and exerts restoring force
(c) The spring is stretched by displacement of the object and exerts restoring force
Real Forces and Inertial Frames
There is another distinction among forces: Some forces are real, whereas others are not. Real forces have some
physical origin, such as a gravitational pull. In contrast, fictitious forces arise simply because an observer is in an
accelerating or noninertial frame of reference, such as one that rotates (like a merry-go-round) or undergoes linear
acceleration (like a car slowing down). For example, if a satellite is heading due north above Earth’s Northern
Hemisphere, then to an observer on Earth, it will appear to experience a force to the west that has no physical origin.
Instead, Earth is rotating toward the east and moves east under the satellite. In Earth’s frame, this looks like a
westward force on the satellite, or it can be interpreted as a violation of Newton’s first law (the law of inertia). We
can identify a fictitious force by asking the question, “What is the reaction force?” If we cannot name the reaction
force, then the force we are considering is fictitious. In the example of the satellite, the reaction force would have to
be an eastward force on Earth. Recall that an inertial frame of reference is one in which all forces are real and,
equivalently, one in which Newton’s laws have the simple forms given in this chapter.
Earth’s rotation is slow enough that Earth is nearly an inertial frame. You ordinarily must perform precise
experiments to observe fictitious forces and the slight departures from Newton’s laws, such as the effect just
described. On a large scale, such as for the rotation of weather systems and ocean currents, the effects can be easily
observed (Figure 5.30).
FIGURE 5.30 Hurricane Fran is shown heading toward the southeastern coast of the United States in September 1996. Notice the
characteristic “eye” shape of the hurricane. This is a result of the Coriolis effect, which is the deflection of objects (in this case, air) when
considered in a rotating frame of reference, like the spin of Earth. This hurricane shows a counter-clockwise rotation because it is a low
pressure storm. (credit "runner": modification of work by "Greenwich Photography"/Flickr)
The crucial factor in determining whether a frame of reference is inertial is whether it accelerates or rotates relative
to a known inertial frame. Unless stated otherwise, all phenomena discussed in this text are in inertial frames.

230 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
The forces discussed in this section are real forces, but they are not the only real forces. Lift and thrust, for example,
are more specialized real forces. In the long list of forces, are some more basic than others? Are some different
manifestations of the same underlying force? The answer to both questions is yes, as you will see in the treatment of
modern physics later in the text.
INTERACTIVE
Explore forces and motion in this interactive simulation (https://openstax.org/l/21ramp) as you push household
objects up and down a ramp. Lower and raise the ramp to see how the angle of inclination affects the parallel forces.
Graphs show forces, energy, and work.
INTERACTIVE
Stretch and compress springs in the simulation below to explore the relationships among force, spring constant, and
displacement. Investigate what happens when two springs are connected in series and in parallel.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21hookeslaw)
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the rules for drawing a free-body diagram
• Construct free-body diagrams for different situations
The first step in describing and analyzing most phenomena in physics involves the careful drawing of a free-body
diagram. Free-body diagrams have been used in examples throughout this chapter. Remember that a free-body
diagram must only include the external forces acting on the body of interest. Once we have drawn an accurate free-
body diagram, we can apply Newton’s first law if the body is in equilibrium (balanced forces; that is, ) or
Newton’s second law if the body is accelerating (unbalanced force; that is, ).
In Forces, we gave a brief problem-solving strategy to help you understand free-body diagrams. Here, we add some
details to the strategy that will help you in constructing these diagrams.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Constructing Free-Body Diagrams
Observe the following rules when constructing a free-body diagram:
1. Draw the object under consideration; it does not have to be artistic. At first, you may want to draw a circle
around the object of interest to be sure you focus on labeling the forces acting on the object. If you are
treating the object as a particle (no size or shape and no rotation), you may wish to represent the object as a
point. We often place this point at the origin of an xy-coordinate system, which should be included in the free
body diagram.
2. Include all forces that act on the object, representing these forces as vectors. Consider the types of forces
described in Common Forces—normal force, friction, tension, and spring force—as well as weight and applied
force. Do not include the net force on the object. With the exception of gravity, all of the forces we have
discussed require direct contact with the object. However, forces that the object exerts on its environment
must not be included. We never include both forces of an action-reaction pair.
3. Convert the free-body diagram into a more detailed diagram showing the x- and y-components of a given
force (this is often helpful when solving a problem using Newton’s first or second law). In this case, place a
squiggly line through the original vector to show that it is no longer in play—it has been replaced by its x- and
y-components.
4. If there are two or more objects, or bodies, in the problem, draw a separate free-body diagram for each object.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.7 • Drawing Free-Body Diagrams 231
Note: If there is acceleration, we do not directly include it in the free-body diagram; however, it may help to indicate
acceleration outside the free-body diagram. You can label it in a different color to indicate that it is separate from
the free-body diagram.
Let’s apply the problem-solving strategy in drawing a free-body diagram for a sled. In Figure 5.31(a), a sled is pulled
by force P at an angle of . In part (b), we show a free-body diagram for this situation, as described by steps 1 and
2 of the problem-solving strategy. In part (c), we show all forces in terms of their x- and y-components, in keeping
with step 3.
FIGURE 5.31 (a) A moving sled is shown as (b) a free-body diagram and (c) a free-body diagram with force components.
EXAMPLE 5.14
Two Blocks on an Inclined Plane
Construct the free-body diagram for object A and object B in Figure 5.32. Assume that the rope pulls object A so
that it slides upward, and that object B is sliding down the slope.
Strategy
We follow the four steps listed in the problem-solving strategy.
Solution
We start by creating a diagram for the first object of interest. In Figure 5.32(a), object A is isolated (circled) and
represented by a dot.
FIGURE 5.32 (a) The free-body diagram for isolated object A. (b) The free-body diagram for isolated object B. Comparing the two drawings,
we see that friction acts in the opposite direction in the two figures. Friction always acts opposite the direction of motion or intended