# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 75-82
############################################################

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 67
2.3 | Images Formed by Refraction
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe image formation by a single refracting surface
• Determine the location of an image and calculate its properties by using a ray diagram
• Determine the location of an image and calculate its properties by using the equation for a
single refracting surface
Whenraysoflightpropagatefromonemediumtoanother,theseraysundergorefraction,whichiswhenlightwavesarebent
attheinterfacebetweentwomedia.Therefractingsurfacecanformanimageinasimilarfashiontoareflectingsurface,
except that the law of refraction (Snell’s law) is at the heart of the process instead of the law of reflection.
Refraction at a Plane Interface—Apparent Depth
Ifyoulookatastraightrodpartiallysubmergedinwater,itappearstobendatthesurface(Figure2.13).Thereasonbehind
thiscuriouseffectisthattheimageoftherodinsidethewaterformsalittleclosertothesurfacethantheactualpositionof
therod,soitdoesnotlineupwiththepartoftherodthatisabovethewater.Thesamephenomenonexplainswhyafishin
water appears to be closer to the surface than it actually is.
Figure 2.13 Bending of a rod at a water-air interface. PointP
on the rod appears to be at pointQ, which is where the image of
pointPforms due to refraction at the air-water interface.
To study image formation as a result of refraction, consider the following questions:
1. What happens to the rays of light when they enter or pass through a different medium?
2. Do the refracted rays originating from a single point meet at some point or diverge away from each other?
Tobeconcrete, weconsider asimple system consisting oftwomedia separated byaplane interface (Figure 2.14).The
objectisinonemediumandtheobserverisintheother.Forinstance,whenyoulookatafishfromabovethewatersurface,
thefishisinmedium1(thewater)withrefractiveindex1.33,andyoureyeisinmedium2(theair)withrefractiveindex
1.00,andthesurfaceofthewateristheinterface.Thedepththatyou“see”istheimageheight h andiscalledtheapparent
i
depth. The actual depth of the fish is the object height h .
o

68 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Figure 2.14 Apparent depth due to refraction. The real object
at pointPcreates an image at pointQ. The image is not at the
same depth as the object, so the observer sees the image at an
“apparent depth.”
Theapparentdepth h dependsontheangleatwhichyouviewtheimage.Foraviewfromabove(theso-called“normal”
i
view), we can approximate the refraction angle θ to be small, and replace sin θ in Snell’s law by tan θ. With this
approximation, you can use the triangles ΔOPR and ΔOQR to show that the apparent depth is given by
h i =
⎛
⎝
n
n
2⎞
⎠ h o.
(2.10)
1
The derivation of this result is left as an exercise. Thus, a fish appears at 3/4 of the real depth when viewed from above.
Refraction at a Spherical Interface
Spherical shapes play an important role in optics primarily because high-quality spherical shapes are far easier to
manufacturethanothercurvedsurfaces.Tostudyrefractionatasinglesphericalsurface,weassumethatthemediumwith
the spherical surface at one end continues indefinitely (a “semi-infinite” medium).
Refraction at a convex surface
ConsiderapointsourceoflightatpointPinfrontofaconvexsurfacemadeofglass(seeFigure2.15).LetRbetheradius
ofcurvature, n betherefractiveindexofthemediuminwhichobjectpointPislocated,and n betherefractiveindex
1 2
of the medium with the spherical surface. We want to know what happens as a result of refraction at this interface.
Figure 2.15 Refraction at a convex surface (n >n ).
2 1
Becauseofthesymmetryinvolved,itissufficienttoexamineraysinonlyoneplane.Thefigureshowsarayoflightthat
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 69
startsattheobjectpointP,refractsattheinterface,andgoesthroughtheimagepoint P′.Wederiveaformularelatingthe
object distance d , the image distance d , and the radius of curvatureR.
o i
Applying Snell’s law to the ray emanating from point P gives n sinθ =n sinθ . We work in the small-angle
1 1 2 2
approximation, so sinθ≈θ and Snell’s law then takes the form
n θ ≈n θ .
1 1 2 2
From the geometry of the figure, we see that
θ =α+ϕ, θ =ϕ−β.
1 2
Inserting these expressions into Snell’s law gives
n (α+ϕ)≈n (ϕ−β).
1 2
Using the diagram, we calculate the tangent of the angles α, β, andϕ:
h h h
tanα≈ , tanβ≈ , tanϕ≈ .
d d R
o i
Again using the small-angle approximation, we find that tanθ≈θ, so the above relationships become
h h h
α≈ , β≈ , ϕ≈ .
d d R
o i
Putting these angles into Snell’s law gives
⎛h h⎞ ⎛h h⎞
n + =n − .
1⎝d R⎠ 2⎝R d ⎠
o i
We can write this more conveniently as
n n n −n (2.11)
1+ 2 = 2 1.
d d R
o i
Iftheobjectisplacedataspecialpointcalledthefirstfocus,ortheobjectfocus F ,thentheimageisformedatinfinity,
1
as shown in part (a) ofFigure 2.16.
Figure 2.16 (a) First focus (called the “object focus”) for refraction at a convex surface. (b) Second focus (called “image
focus”) for refraction at a convex surface.
We can find the location f of the first focus F by setting d =∞ in the preceding equation.
1 1 i

70 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
n n n −n (2.12)
1+ 2 = 2 1
f ∞ R
1
n R (2.13)
f 1 = n − 1 n
2 1
Similarly,wecandefineasecondfocusorimagefocus F wheretheimageisformedforanobjectthatisfaraway[part
2
(b)]. The location of the second focus F
2
is obtained fromEquation 2.11by setting d o=∞:
n n n −n
1+ 2 = 2 1
∞ f R
2
n R
f 2 = n − 2 n .
2 1
Note that the object focus is at a different distance from the vertex than the image focus because n ≠n .
1 2
Sign convention for single refracting surfaces
Although we derived this equation for refraction at a convex surface, the same expression holds for a concave surface,
provided we use the following sign convention:
1. R>0 if surface is convex toward object; otherwise, R<0.
2. d >0 if image is real and on opposite side from the object; otherwise, d <0.
i i
2.4 | Thin Lenses
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use ray diagrams to locate and describe the image formed by a lens
• Employ the thin-lens equation to describe and locate the image formed by a lens
Lensesarefoundinahugearrayofopticalinstruments,rangingfromasimplemagnifyingglasstoacamera’szoomlensto
the eye itself. In this section, we use the Snell’s law to explore the properties of lenses and how they form images.
The word “lens” derives from the Latin word for a lentil bean, the shape of which is similar to a convex lens. However,
notalllenseshavethesameshape.Figure2.17showsavarietyofdifferentlensshapes.Thevocabularyusedtodescribe
lensesisthesameasthatusedforsphericalmirrors:Theaxisofsymmetryofalensiscalledtheopticalaxis,wherethis
axis intersects the lens surface is called the vertex of the lens, and so forth.
Figure 2.17 Various types of lenses: Note that a converging lens has a thicker “waist,” whereas a
diverging lens has a thinner waist.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 71
A convex or converging lens is shaped so that all light rays that enter it parallel to its optical axis intersect (or focus)
at a single point on the optical axis on the opposite side of the lens, as shown in part (a) of Figure 2.18. Likewise, a
concave or diverging lens is shaped so that all rays that enter it parallel to its optical axis diverge, as shown in part (b).
To understand more precisely how a lens manipulates light, look closely at the top ray that goes through the converging
lensinpart(a).Becausetheindexofrefractionofthelensisgreaterthanthatofair,Snell’slawtellsusthattherayisbent
towardtheperpendiculartotheinterfaceasitentersthelens.Likewise,whentherayexitsthelens,itisbentawayfromthe
perpendicular.Thesamereasoningappliestothediverginglenses,asshowninpart(b).Theoveralleffectisthatlightrays
arebenttowardtheopticalaxisforaconverginglensandawayfromtheopticalaxisfordiverginglenses.Foraconverging
lens,thepointatwhichtherayscrossisthefocalpointFofthelens.Foradiverginglens,thepointfromwhichtherays
appeartooriginateisthe(virtual)focalpoint.Thedistancefromthecenterofthelenstoitsfocalpointisthefocallengthf
of the lens.
Figure 2.18 Rays of light entering (a) a converging lens and (b) a diverging lens, parallel to its axis, converge at its focal
pointF. The distance from the center of the lens to the focal point is the lens’s focal lengthf. Note that the light rays are
bent upon entering and exiting the lens, with the overall effect being to bend the rays toward the optical axis.
Alensisconsideredtobethinifitsthicknesstismuchlessthantheradiiofcurvatureofbothsurfaces,asshowninFigure
2.19.Inthiscase,theraysmaybeconsideredtobendonceatthecenterofthelens.Forthecasedrawninthefigure,light
ray1isparalleltotheopticalaxis,sotheoutgoingrayisbentonceatthecenterofthelensandgoesthroughthefocalpoint.
Anotherimportantcharacteristicofthinlensesisthatlightraysthatpassthroughthecenterofthelensareundeviated,as
shown by light ray 2.

72 Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Figure 2.19 In the thin-lens approximation, the thicknessdof the lens is much, much less than the radii R and R of
1 2
curvature of the surfaces of the lens. Light rays are considered to bend at the center of the lens, such as light ray 1. Light ray 2
passes through the center of the lens and is undeviated in the thin-lens approximation.
AsnotedintheinitialdiscussionofSnell’slaw,thepathsoflightraysareexactlyreversible.Thismeansthatthedirection
ofthearrowscouldbereversedforalloftheraysinFigure2.18.Forexample,ifapoint-lightsourceisplacedatthefocal
point of a convex lens, as shown inFigure 2.20, parallel light rays emerge from the other side.
Figure 2.20 A small light source, like a light bulb filament,
placed at the focal point of a convex lens results in parallel rays
of light emerging from the other side. The paths are exactly the
reverse of those shown inFigure 2.18in converging and
diverging lenses. This technique is used in lighthouses and
sometimes in traffic lights to produce a directional beam of light
from a source that emits light in all directions.
Ray Tracing and Thin Lenses
Ray tracingis the technique of determining or following (tracing) the paths taken by light rays.
Raytracingforthinlensesisverysimilartothetechniqueweusedwithsphericalmirrors.Asformirrors,raytracingcan
accurately describe the operation of a lens. The rules for ray tracing for thin lenses are similar to those of spherical mirrors:
1. Arayenteringaconverginglensparalleltotheopticalaxispassesthroughthefocalpointontheothersideofthe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 2 | Geometric Optics and Image Formation 73
lens(ray1inpart(a)ofFigure 2.21).Arayenteringadiverginglensparalleltotheopticalaxisexitsalongthe
line that passes through the focal point on thesameside of the lens (ray 1 in part (b) of the figure).
2. Araypassingthroughthecenter ofeither aconvergingoradiverginglensisnotdeviated (ray2inparts(a)and
(b)).
3. Foraconverginglens,araythatpassesthroughthefocalpointexitsthelensparalleltotheopticalaxis(ray3inpart
(a)).Foradiverginglens,araythatapproachesalongthelinethatpassesthroughthefocalpointontheopposite
side exits the lens parallel to the axis (ray 3 in part (b)).
Figure 2.21 Thin lenses have the same focal lengths on either side. (a) Parallel light rays entering a converging lens from the
right cross at its focal point on the left. (b) Parallel light rays entering a diverging lens from the right seem to come from the
focal point on the right.
Thin lenses workquite well formonochromatic light (i.e., light ofa single wavelength). However,forlight that contains
several wavelengths (e.g., white light), the lenses work less well. The problem is that, as we learned in the previous
chapter,theindexofrefractionofamaterialdependsonthewavelengthoflight.Thisphenomenonisresponsibleformany
colorfuleffects,suchasrainbows.Unfortunately,thisphenomenonalsoleadstoaberrationsinimagesformedbylenses.In
particular,becausethefocaldistanceofthelensdependsontheindexofrefraction,italsodependsonthewavelengthofthe
incidentlight.Thismeansthatlightofdifferentwavelengthswillfocusatdifferentpoints,resultingisso-called“chromatic
aberrations.”Inparticular,theedgesofanimageofawhiteobjectwillbecomecoloredandblurred.Speciallensescalled
doubletsarecapableofcorrectingchromaticaberrations.Adoubletisformedbygluingtogetheraconverginglensanda
diverging lens. The combined doublet lens produces significantly reduced chromatic aberrations.
Image Formation by Thin Lenses
Weuseraytracingtoinvestigatedifferenttypesofimagesthatcanbecreatedbyalens.Insomecircumstances,alensforms
a real image, such as when a movie projector casts an image onto a screen. In other cases, the image is a virtual image,
whichcannotbeprojectedontoascreen.Where,forexample,istheimageformedbyeyeglasses?Weuseraytracingfor
thin lenses to illustrate how they form images, and then we develop equations to analyze quantitatively the properties of
thin lenses.
Consideranobjectsomedistanceawayfromaconverginglens,asshowninFigure2.22.Tofindthelocationandsizeof
theimage,wetracethepathsofselectedlightraysoriginatingfromonepointontheobject,inthiscase,thetipofthearrow.