# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 261-267
############################################################

CHAPTER 6
Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.1 Stock cars racing in the Grand National Divisional race at Iowa Speedway in May, 2015. Cars often reach speeds of 200 mph
(320 km/h). (credit: modification of work by Erik Schneider/U.S. Navy)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws
6.2 Friction
6.3 Centripetal Force
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
INTRODUCTION As a racecar moves in a curved path around the turn, its wheels also spin rapidly. The wheels
complete many revolutions while the car makes only part of one (a circular arc). How can we describe the velocities,
accelerations, and forces involved? What force keeps a racecar from spinning out, hitting the wall bordering the
track? What provides this force? Why is the track banked? We answer all of these questions in this chapter as we
expand our consideration of Newton’s laws of motion.
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply problem-solving techniques to solve for quantities in more complex systems of forces
• Use concepts from kinematics to solve problems using Newton’s laws of motion
• Solve more complex equilibrium problems
• Solve more complex acceleration problems
• Apply calculus to more advanced dynamics problems
Success in problem solving is necessary to understand and apply physical principles. We developed a pattern of
analyzing and setting up the solutions to problems involving Newton’s laws in Newton’s Laws of Motion; in this
chapter, we continue to discuss these strategies and apply a step-by-step process.

250 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Problem-Solving Strategies
We follow here the basics of problem solving presented earlier in this text, but we emphasize specific strategies that
are useful in applying Newton’s laws of motion. Once you identify the physical principles involved in the problem and
determine that they include Newton’s laws of motion, you can apply these steps to find a solution. These techniques
also reinforce concepts that are useful in many other areas of physics. Many problem-solving strategies are stated
outright in the worked examples, so the following techniques should reinforce skills you have already begun to
develop.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Applying Newton’s Laws of Motion
1. Identify the physical principles involved by listing the givens and the quantities to be calculated.
2. Sketch the situation, using arrows to represent all forces.
3. Determine the system of interest. The result is a free-body diagram that is essential to solving the problem.
4. Apply Newton’s second law to solve the problem. If necessary, apply appropriate kinematic equations from
the chapter on motion along a straight line.
5. Check the solution to see whether it is reasonable.
Let’s apply this problem-solving strategy to the challenge of lifting a grand piano into a second-story apartment.
Once we have determined that Newton’s laws of motion are involved (if the problem involves forces), it is
particularly important to draw a careful sketch of the situation. Such a sketch is shown in Figure 6.2(a). Then, as in
Figure 6.2(b), we can represent all forces with arrows. Whenever sufficient information exists, it is best to label
these arrows carefully and make the length and direction of each correspond to the represented force.
FIGURE 6.2 (a) A grand piano is being lifted to a second-story apartment. (b) Arrows are used to represent all forces: is the tension in the
rope above the piano, is the force that the piano exerts on the rope, and is the weight of the piano. All other forces, such as the nudge
of a breeze, are assumed to be negligible. (c) Suppose we are given the piano’s mass and asked to find the tension in the rope. We then
define the system of interest as shown and draw a free-body diagram. Now is no longer shown, because it is not a force acting on the
system of interest; rather, acts on the outside world. (d) Showing only the arrows, the head-to-tail method of addition is used. It is
apparent that if the piano is stationary, .
As with most problems, we next need to identify what needs to be determined and what is known or can be inferred
from the problem as stated, that is, make a list of knowns and unknowns. It is particularly crucial to identify the
system of interest, since Newton’s second law involves only external forces. We can then determine which forces
are external and which are internal, a necessary step to employ Newton’s second law. (See Figure 6.2(c).) Newton’s
third law may be used to identify whether forces are exerted between components of a system (internal) or between
Access for free at openstax.org

6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 251
the system and something outside (external). As illustrated in Newton’s Laws of Motion, the system of interest
depends on the question we need to answer. Only forces are shown in free-body diagrams, not acceleration or
velocity. We have drawn several free-body diagrams in previous worked examples. Figure 6.2(c) shows a free-body
diagram for the system of interest. Note that no internal forces are shown in a free-body diagram.
Once a free-body diagram is drawn, we apply Newton’s second law. This is done in Figure 6.2(d) for a particular
situation. In general, once external forces are clearly identified in free-body diagrams, it should be a straightforward
task to put them into equation form and solve for the unknown, as done in all previous examples. If the problem is
one-dimensional—that is, if all forces are parallel—then the forces can be handled algebraically. If the problem is
two-dimensional, then it must be broken down into a pair of one-dimensional problems. We do this by projecting the
force vectors onto a set of axes chosen for convenience. As seen in previous examples, the choice of axes can
simplify the problem. For example, when an incline is involved, a set of axes with one axis parallel to the incline and
one perpendicular to it is most convenient. It is almost always convenient to make one axis parallel to the direction
of motion, if this is known. Generally, just write Newton’s second law in components along the different directions.
Then, you have the following equations:
(If, for example, the system is accelerating horizontally, then you can then set ) We need this information to
determine unknown forces acting on a system.
As always, we must check the solution. In some cases, it is easy to tell whether the solution is reasonable. For
example, it is reasonable to find that friction causes an object to slide down an incline more slowly than when no
friction exists. In practice, intuition develops gradually through problem solving; with experience, it becomes
progressively easier to judge whether an answer is reasonable. Another way to check a solution is to check the units.
If we are solving for force and end up with units of millimeters per second, then we have made a mistake.
There are many interesting applications of Newton’s laws of motion, a few more of which are presented in this
section. These serve also to illustrate some further subtleties of physics and to help build problem-solving skills. We
look first at problems involving particle equilibrium, which make use of Newton’s first law, and then consider particle
acceleration, which involves Newton’s second law.
Particle Equilibrium
Recall that a particle in equilibrium is one for which the external forces are balanced. Static equilibrium involves
objects at rest, and dynamic equilibrium involves objects in motion without acceleration, but it is important to
remember that these conditions are relative. For example, an object may be at rest when viewed from our frame of
reference, but the same object would appear to be in motion when viewed by someone moving at a constant
velocity. We now make use of the knowledge attained in Newton’s Laws of Motion, regarding the different types of
forces and the use of free-body diagrams, to solve additional problems in particle equilibrium.
EXAMPLE 6.1
Different Tensions at Different Angles
Consider the traffic light (mass of 15.0 kg) suspended from two wires as shown in Figure 6.3. Find the tension in
each wire, neglecting the masses of the wires.

252 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.3 A traffic light is suspended from two wires. (b) Some of the forces involved. (c) Only forces acting on the system are shown
here. The free-body diagram for the traffic light is also shown. (d) The forces projected onto vertical (y) and horizontal (x) axes. The
horizontal components of the tensions must cancel, and the sum of the vertical components of the tensions must equal the weight of the
traffic light. (e) The free-body diagram shows the vertical and horizontal forces acting on the traffic light.
Strategy
The system of interest is the traffic light, and its free-body diagram is shown in Figure 6.3(c). The three forces
involved are not parallel, and so they must be projected onto a coordinate system. The most convenient coordinate
system has one axis vertical and one horizontal, and the vector projections on it are shown in Figure 6.3(d). There
are two unknowns in this problem ( and ), so two equations are needed to find them. These two equations
come from applying Newton’s second law along the vertical and horizontal axes, noting that the net external force is
zero along each axis because acceleration is zero.
Solution
First consider the horizontal or x-axis:
where and are the magnitudes of the x components of the tension forces.
Thus, as you might expect,
This gives us the following relationship:
Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org

6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 253
Note that and are not equal in this case because the angles on either side are not equal. It is reasonable that
ends up being greater than because it is exerted more vertically than
Now consider the force components along the vertical or y-axis:
This implies
Substituting the expressions for the vertical components gives
There are two unknowns in this equation, but substituting the expression for in terms of reduces this to one
equation with one unknown:
which yields
Solving this last equation gives the magnitude of to be
Finally, we find the magnitude of by using the relationship between them, , found above. Thus we
obtain
Significance
Both tensions would be larger if both wires were more horizontal, and they will be equal if and only if the angles on
either side are the same (as they were in the earlier example of a tightrope walker in Newton’s Laws of Motion.
Particle Acceleration
We have given a variety of examples of particles in equilibrium. We now turn our attention to particle acceleration
problems, which are the result of a nonzero net force. Refer again to the steps given at the beginning of this section,
and notice how they are applied to the following examples.
EXAMPLE 6.2
Drag Force on a Barge
Two tugboats push on a barge at different angles (Figure 6.4). The first tugboat exerts a force of in the
x-direction, and the second tugboat exerts a force of in the y-direction. The mass of the barge is
and its acceleration is observed to be in the direction shown. What is the drag force
of the water on the barge resisting the motion? (Note: Drag force is a frictional force exerted by fluids, such as air or
water. The drag force opposes the motion of the object. Since the barge is flat bottomed, we can assume that the
drag force is in the direction opposite of motion of the barge.) Assume that the motion and acceleration of the barge
are in the same direction.

254 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.4 (a) A view from above of two tugboats pushing on a barge. (b) The free-body diagram for the ship contains only forces acting in
the plane of the water. It omits the two vertical forces—the weight of the barge and the buoyant force of the water supporting it cancel and
are not shown. Note that is the total applied force of the tugboats.
Strategy
The directions and magnitudes of acceleration and the applied forces are given in Figure 6.4(a). We define the total
force of the tugboats on the barge as so that
The drag of the water is in the direction opposite to the direction of motion of the boat; this force thus works
against as shown in the free-body diagram in Figure 6.4(b). The system of interest here is the barge, since the
forces on it are given as well as its acceleration. Because the applied forces are perpendicular, the x- and y-axes are
in the same direction as and The problem quickly becomes a one-dimensional problem along the direction of
, since friction is in the direction opposite to Our strategy is to find the magnitude and direction of the net
applied force and then apply Newton’s second law to solve for the drag force
Solution
Since and are perpendicular, we can find the magnitude and direction of directly. First, the resultant
magnitude is given by the Pythagorean theorem:
The angle is given by
From Newton’s first law, we know this is the same direction as the acceleration. We also know that is in the
opposite direction of since it acts to slow down the acceleration. Therefore, the net external force is in the
same direction as but its magnitude is slightly less than The problem is now one-dimensional. From the
free-body diagram, we can see that
However, Newton’s second law states that
Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org