# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 70-77
############################################################

58 2 • Vectors
In many applications, the magnitudes and directions of vector quantities are known and we need to find the
resultant of many vectors. For example, imagine 400 cars moving on the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco in a
strong wind. Each car gives the bridge a different push in various directions and we would like to know how big the
resultant push can possibly be. We have already gained some experience with the geometric construction of vector
sums, so we know the task of finding the resultant by drawing the vectors and measuring their lengths and angles
may become intractable pretty quickly, leading to huge errors. Worries like this do not appear when we use
analytical methods. The very first step in an analytical approach is to find vector components when the direction and
magnitude of a vector are known.
Let us return to the right triangle in Figure 2.18. The quotient of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse A is the
cosine function of direction angle , , and the quotient of the opposite side to the hypotenuse A
is the sine function of , . When magnitude A and direction are known, we can solve these
relations for the scalar components:
2.17
When calculating vector components with Equation 2.17, care must be taken with the angle. The direction angle
of a vector is the angle measured counterclockwise from the positive direction on the x-axis to the vector. The
clockwise measurement gives a negative angle.
EXAMPLE 2.5
Components of Displacement Vectors
A rescue party for a missing child follows a search dog named Trooper. Trooper wanders a lot and makes many trial
sniffs along many different paths. Trooper eventually finds the child and the story has a happy ending, but his
displacements on various legs seem to be truly convoluted. On one of the legs he walks 200.0 m southeast, then he
runs north some 300.0 m. On the third leg, he examines the scents carefully for 50.0 m in the direction west of
north. On the fourth leg, Trooper goes directly south for 80.0 m, picks up a fresh scent and turns west of south
for 150.0 m. Find the scalar components of Trooper’s displacement vectors and his displacement vectors in vector
component form for each leg.
Strategy
Let’s adopt a rectangular coordinate system with the positive x-axis in the direction of geographic east, with the
positive y-direction pointed to geographic north. Explicitly, the unit vector of the x-axis points east and the unit
vector of the y-axis points north. Trooper makes five legs, so there are five displacement vectors. We start by
identifying their magnitudes and direction angles, then we use Equation 2.17 to find the scalar components of the
displacements and Equation 2.12 for the displacement vectors.
Solution
On the first leg, the displacement magnitude is and the direction is southeast. For direction angle
we can take either measured clockwise from the east direction or measured counterclockwise from
the east direction. With the first choice, . With the second choice, . We can use either one of
these two angles. The components are
The displacement vector of the first leg is
On the second leg of Trooper’s wanderings, the magnitude of the displacement is and the direction is
north. The direction angle is . We obtain the following results:
Access for free at openstax.org

2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 59
On the third leg, the displacement magnitude is and the direction is west of north. The direction
angle measured counterclockwise from the eastern direction is . This gives the following
answers:
On the fourth leg of the excursion, the displacement magnitude is and the direction is south. The
direction angle can be taken as either or . We obtain
On the last leg, the magnitude is and the angle is west of south),
which gives
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.6
If Trooper runs 20 m west before taking a rest, what is his displacement vector?
Polar Coordinates
To describe locations of points or vectors in a plane, we need two orthogonal directions. In the Cartesian coordinate
system these directions are given by unit vectors and along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively. The Cartesian
coordinate system is very convenient to use in describing displacements and velocities of objects and the forces
acting on them. However, it becomes cumbersome when we need to describe the rotation of objects. When
describing rotation, we usually work in the polar coordinate system.
In the polar coordinate system, the location of point P in a plane is given by two polar coordinates (Figure 2.20).
The first polar coordinate is the radial coordinate r, which is the distance of point P from the origin. The second
polar coordinate is an angle that the radial vector makes with some chosen direction, usually the positive
x-direction. In polar coordinates, angles are measured in radians, or rads. The radial vector is attached at the origin
and points away from the origin to point P. This radial direction is described by a unit radial vector . The second unit
vector is a vector orthogonal to the radial direction . The positive direction indicates how the angle changes
in the counterclockwise direction. In this way, a point P that has coordinates (x, y) in the rectangular system can be
described equivalently in the polar coordinate system by the two polar coordinates . Equation 2.17 is valid for
any vector, so we can use it to express the x- and y-coordinates of vector . In this way, we obtain the connection
between the polar coordinates and rectangular coordinates of point P:
2.18

60 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.20 Using polar coordinates, the unit vector defines the positive direction along the radius r (radial direction) and, orthogonal to
it, the unit vector defines the positive direction of rotation by the angle .
EXAMPLE 2.6
Polar Coordinates
A treasure hunter finds one silver coin at a location 20.0 m away from a dry well in the direction north of east
and finds one gold coin at a location 10.0 m away from the well in the direction north of west. What are the polar
and rectangular coordinates of these findings with respect to the well?
Strategy
The well marks the origin of the coordinate system and east is the +x-direction. We identify radial distances from the
locations to the origin, which are (for the silver coin) and (for the gold coin). To find the
angular coordinates, we convert to radians: . We use Equation 2.18 to find the x- and
y-coordinates of the coins.
Solution
The angular coordinate of the silver coin is , whereas the angular coordinate of the gold coin is
. Hence, the polar coordinates of the silver coin are and those of the
gold coin are . We substitute these coordinates into Equation 2.18 to obtain rectangular
coordinates. For the gold coin, the coordinates are
For the silver coin, the coordinates are
Vectors in Three Dimensions
To specify the location of a point in space, we need three coordinates (x, y, z), where coordinates x and y specify
locations in a plane, and coordinate z gives a vertical position above or below the plane. Three-dimensional space
has three orthogonal directions, so we need not two but three unit vectors to define a three-dimensional coordinate
system. In the Cartesian coordinate system, the first two unit vectors are the unit vector of the x-axis and the unit
vector of the y-axis . The third unit vector is the direction of the z-axis (Figure 2.21). The order in which the axes
are labeled, which is the order in which the three unit vectors appear, is important because it defines the orientation
Access for free at openstax.org

2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 61
of the coordinate system. The order x-y-z, which is equivalent to the order - - , defines the standard right-
handed coordinate system (positive orientation). Notice that while previously the y-axis was used for the upward
direction, in three dimensions we usually choose z to represent the vertical. A right-handed coordinate system with
z up and with one of the remaining axes pointing to the right and the other out of the page must have the y-axis
pointing right and x out of the page, as illustrated here.
FIGURE 2.21 Three unit vectors define a Cartesian system in three-dimensional space. The order in which these unit vectors appear
defines the orientation of the coordinate system. The order shown here defines the right-handed orientation.
In three-dimensional space, vector has three vector components: the x-component , which is the part
of vector along the x-axis; the y-component , which is the part of along the y-axis; and the
z-component , which is the part of the vector along the z-axis. A vector in three-dimensional space is the
vector sum of its three vector components (Figure 2.22):
2.19
If we know the coordinates of its origin and of its end , its scalar components are obtained
by taking their differences: and are given by Equation 2.13 and the z-component is given by
2.20
Magnitude A is obtained by generalizing Equation 2.15 to three dimensions:
2.21
This expression for the vector magnitude comes from applying the Pythagorean theorem twice. As seen in Figure
2.22, the diagonal in the xy-plane has length and its square adds to the square to give . Note that
when the z-component is zero, the vector lies entirely in the xy-plane and its description is reduced to two
dimensions.

62 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.22 A vector in three-dimensional space is the vector sum of its three vector components.
EXAMPLE 2.7
Takeoff of a Drone
During a takeoff of IAI Heron (Figure 2.23), its position with respect to a control tower is 100 m above the ground,
300 m to the east, and 200 m to the north. One minute later, its position is 250 m above the ground, 1200 m to the
east, and 2100 m to the north. What is the drone’s displacement vector with respect to the control tower? What is
the magnitude of its displacement vector?
FIGURE 2.23 The drone IAI Heron in flight. (credit: SSgt Reynaldo Ramon, USAF)
Strategy
We take the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system as the control tower. The direction of the +x-axis is given by
unit vector to the east, the direction of the +y-axis is given by unit vector to the north, and the direction of the
+z-axis is given by unit vector , which points up from the ground. The drone’s first position is the origin (or,
equivalently, the beginning) of the displacement vector and its second position is the end of the displacement
vector.
Solution
We identify b(300.0 m, 200.0 m, 100.0 m) and e(1200 m, 2100 m, 250 m), and use Equation 2.13 and Equation
2.20 to find the scalar components of the drone’s displacement vector:
Access for free at openstax.org

2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 63
We substitute these components into Equation 2.19 to find the displacement vector:
We substitute into Equation 2.21 to find the magnitude of the displacement:
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.7
If the average velocity vector of the drone in the displacement in Example 2.7 is ,
what is the magnitude of the drone’s velocity vector?
2.3 Algebra of Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply analytical methods of vector algebra to find resultant vectors and to solve vector equations for
unknown vectors.
• Interpret physical situations in terms of vector expressions.
Vectors can be added together and multiplied by scalars. Vector addition is associative (Equation 2.8) and
commutative (Equation 2.7), and vector multiplication by a sum of scalars is distributive (Equation 2.9). Also, scalar
multiplication by a sum of vectors is distributive:
2.22
In this equation, is any number (a scalar). For example, a vector antiparallel to vector can
be expressed simply by multiplying by the scalar :
2.23
EXAMPLE 2.8
Direction of Motion
In a Cartesian coordinate system where denotes geographic east, denotes geographic north, and denotes
altitude above sea level, a military convoy advances its position through unknown territory with velocity
. If the convoy had to retreat, in what geographic direction would it be moving?
Solution
The velocity vector has the third component , which says the convoy is climbing at a rate of 100
m/h through mountainous terrain. At the same time, its velocity is 4.0 km/h to the east and 3.0 km/h to the north, so
it moves on the ground in direction north of east. If the convoy had to retreat, its new velocity
vector would have to be antiparallel to and be in the form , where is a positive number. Thus, the
velocity of the retreat would be . The negative sign of the third component
indicates the convoy would be descending. The direction angle of the retreat velocity is
south of west. Therefore, the convoy would be moving on the ground in direction south of west while
descending on its way back.
The generalization of the number zero to vector algebra is called the null vector, denoted by . All components of

64 2 • Vectors
the null vector are zero, , so the null vector has no length and no direction.
Two vectors and are equal vectors if and only if their difference is the null vector:
This vector equation means we must have simultaneously , , and . Hence,
we can write if and only if the corresponding components of vectors and are equal:
2.24
Two vectors are equal when their corresponding scalar components are equal.
Resolving vectors into their scalar components (i.e., finding their scalar components) and expressing them
analytically in vector component form (given by Equation 2.19) allows us to use vector algebra to find sums or
differences of many vectors analytically (i.e., without using graphical methods). For example, to find the resultant of
two vectors and , we simply add them component by component, as follows:
In this way, using Equation 2.24, scalar components of the resultant vector are the sums of
corresponding scalar components of vectors and :
Analytical methods can be used to find components of a resultant of many vectors. For example, if we are to sum up
vectors , where each vector is , the resultant vector is
Therefore, scalar components of the resultant vector are
2.25
Having found the scalar components, we can write the resultant in vector component form:
Analytical methods for finding the resultant and, in general, for solving vector equations are very important in
physics because many physical quantities are vectors. For example, we use this method in kinematics to find
Access for free at openstax.org