# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 156-162
############################################################

144 3 • Chapter Review
86 . A particle moves along the x-axis according to rest at point B 3.0 min later. (a) Sketch the
the equation m. What are the velocity-versus-time graph for the trip. (b) What
velocity and acceleration at s and is the acceleration during the last 3 min? (c) How
s? far does the cyclist travel?
87 . A particle moving at constant acceleration has 93 . Two trains are moving at 30 m/s in opposite
velocities of at s and at directions on the same track. The engineers see
s. What is the acceleration of the simultaneously that they are on a collision
particle? course and apply the brakes when they are 1000
m apart. Assuming both trains have the same
88 . A train is moving up a steep grade at constant
acceleration, what must this acceleration be if
velocity (see following figure) when its caboose
the trains are to stop just short of colliding?
breaks loose and starts rolling freely along the track.
After 5.0 s, the caboose is 30 m behind the train. 94 . A 10.0-m-long truck moving with a constant velocity
What is the acceleration of the caboose? of 97.0 km/h passes a 3.0-m-long car moving with a
constant velocity of 80.0 km/h. How much time
elapses between the moment the front of the truck
is even with the back of the car and the moment the
back of the truck is even with the front of the car?
89 . An electron is moving in a straight line with a
velocity of m/s. It enters a region 5.0
cm long where it undergoes an acceleration of
along the same straight line.
(a) What is the electron’s velocity when it
emerges from this region? b) How long does the
electron take to cross the region?
90 . An ambulance driver is rushing a patient to the
hospital. While traveling at 72 km/h, she notices
the traffic light at the upcoming intersections
has turned amber. To reach the intersection
before the light turns red, she must travel 50 m
in 2.0 s. (a) What minimum acceleration must
the ambulance have to reach the intersection
before the light turns red? (b) What is the speed
of the ambulance when it reaches the
intersection?
95 . A police car waits in hiding slightly off the
91 . A motorcycle that is slowing down uniformly
highway. A speeding car is spotted by the police
covers 2.0 successive km in 80 s and 120 s,
car doing 40 m/s. At the instant the speeding car
respectively. Calculate (a) the acceleration of the
passes the police car, the police car accelerates
motorcycle and (b) its velocity at the beginning
from rest at 4 m/s2 to catch the speeding car.
and end of the 2-km trip.
How long does it take the police car to catch the
92 . A cyclist travels from point A to point B in 10 speeding car?
min. During the first 2.0 min of her trip, she
96 . Pablo is running in a half marathon at a velocity
maintains a uniform acceleration of .
of 3 m/s. Another runner, Jacob, is 50 meters
She then travels at constant velocity for the next
behind Pablo with the same velocity. Jacob
5.0 min. Next, she accelerates opposite to the begins to accelerate at 0.05 m/s2. (a) How long
motion at a constant rate so that she comes to a
Access for free at openstax.org

3 • Chapter Review 145
does it take Jacob to catch Pablo? (b) What is number?
the distance covered by Jacob? (c) What is the
105 . Compare the time in the air of a basketball
final velocity of Jacob?
player who jumps 1.0 m vertically off the floor
97 . Unreasonable results A runner approaches the with that of a player who jumps 0.3 m vertically.
finish line and is 75 m away; her speed at this
106 . Suppose that a person takes 0.5 s to react and
position is 8 m/s. She accelerates opposite to
move his hand to catch an object he has
the motion at this point at 0.5 m/s2. How long
dropped. (a) How far does the object fall on
does it take her to cross the finish line from 75 m
Earth, where (b) How far does the
away? Is this reasonable?
object fall on the Moon, where the acceleration
98 . An airplane accelerates at 5.00 m/s2 for 30.0 s. due to gravity is 1/6 of that on Earth?
During this time, it covers a distance of 10.0 km.
107 . A hot-air balloon rises from ground level at a
What are the initial and final velocities of the
constant velocity of 3.0 m/s. One minute after
airplane?
liftoff, a sandbag is dropped accidentally from
99 . Compare the distance traveled of an object that the balloon. Calculate (a) the time it takes for the
undergoes a change in velocity that is twice its sandbag to reach the ground and (b) the velocity
initial velocity with an object that changes its of the sandbag when it hits the ground.
velocity by four times its initial velocity over the
108 . (a) A world record was set for the men’s 100-m
same time period. The accelerations of both
dash in the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing by
objects are constant.
Usain Bolt of Jamaica. Bolt “coasted” across the
100 . An object is moving east with a constant velocity finish line with a time of 9.69 s. If we assume
and is at position . (a) With that Bolt accelerated for 3.00 s to reach his
what acceleration must the object have for its maximum speed, and maintained that speed for
total displacement to be zero at a later time t ? the rest of the race, calculate his maximum
(b) What is the physical interpretation of the speed and his acceleration. (b) During the same
solution in the case for ∞? Olympics, Bolt also set the world record in the
200-m dash with a time of 19.30 s. Using the
101 . A ball is thrown straight up. It passes a 2.00-m- same assumptions as for the 100-m dash, what
high window 7.50 m off the ground on its path was his maximum speed for this race?
up and takes 1.30 s to go past the window. What
109 . An object is dropped from a height of 75.0 m
was the ball’s initial velocity?
above ground level. (a) Determine the distance
102 . A coin is dropped from a hot-air balloon that is traveled during the first second. (b) Determine
300 m above the ground and rising at 10.0 m/s the final velocity at which the object hits the
upward. For the coin, find (a) the maximum ground. (c) Determine the distance traveled
height reached, (b) its position and velocity 4.00 during the last second of motion before hitting
s after being released, and (c) the time before it the ground.
hits the ground.
110 . A steel ball is dropped onto a hard floor from a
103 . A soft tennis ball is dropped onto a hard floor height of 1.50 m and rebounds to a height of
from a height of 1.50 m and rebounds to a height 1.45 m. (a) Calculate its velocity just before it
of 1.10 m. (a) Calculate its velocity just before it strikes the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just
strikes the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just after it leaves the floor on its way back up. (c)
after it leaves the floor on its way back up. (c) Calculate its acceleration during contact with the
Calculate its acceleration during contact with the floor if that contact lasts 0.0800 ms
floor if that contact lasts 3.50 ms (d) How much did the ball
(d) How much did the ball compress during its collision with the floor,
compress during its collision with the floor, assuming the floor is absolutely rigid?
assuming the floor is absolutely rigid?
111 . An object is dropped from a roof of a building of
104 . Unreasonable results. A raindrop falls from a height h. During the last second of its descent, it
cloud 100 m above the ground. Neglect air drops a distance h/3. Calculate the height of the
resistance. What is the speed of the raindrop building.
when it hits the ground? Is this a reasonable

146 3 • Chapter Review
Challenge Problems
112 . In a 100-m race, the winner is timed at 11.2 s. is 300 m from the finish line when she starts to
The second-place finisher’s time is 11.6 s. How accelerate, how much time did she save? (c) The
far is the second-place finisher behind the second-place winner was 5.00 m ahead when
winner when she crosses the finish line? Assume the winner started to accelerate, but he was
the velocity of each runner is constant unable to accelerate, and traveled at 11.8 m/s
throughout the race. until the finish line. What was the difference in
finish time in seconds between the winner and
113 . The position of a particle moving along the
runner-up? How far back was the runner-up
x-axis varies with time according to
when the winner crossed the finish line?
m. Find (a) the velocity and
acceleration of the particle as functions of time, 115 . In 1967, New Zealander Burt Munro set the
(b) the velocity and acceleration at t = 2.0 s, (c) world record for an Indian motorcycle, on the
the time at which the position is a maximum, (d) Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, of 295.38 km/h.
the time at which the velocity is zero, and (e) the The one-way course was 8.00 km long.
maximum position. Acceleration rates are often described by the
time it takes to reach 96.0 km/h from rest. If this
114 . A cyclist sprints at the end of a race to clinch a
time was 4.00 s and Burt accelerated at this rate
victory. She has an initial velocity of 11.5 m/s
until he reached his maximum speed, how long
and accelerates at a rate of 0.500 m/s2 for 7.00
did it take Burt to complete the course?
s. (a) What is her final velocity? (b) The cyclist
continues at this velocity to the finish line. If she
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 4
Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.1 The Red Arrows is the aerobatics display team of Britain’s Royal Air Force. Based in Lincolnshire, England, they perform
precision flying shows at high speeds, which requires accurate measurement of position, velocity, and acceleration in three dimensions.
(credit: modification of work by Phil Long)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
4.2 Acceleration Vector
4.3 Projectile Motion
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
INTRODUCTION To give a complete description of kinematics, we must explore motion in two and three
dimensions. After all, most objects in our universe do not move in straight lines; rather, they follow curved paths.
From kicked footballs to the flight paths of birds to the orbital motions of celestial bodies and down to the flow of
blood plasma in your veins, most motion follows curved trajectories.
Fortunately, the treatment of motion in one dimension in the previous chapter has given us a foundation on which to
build, as the concepts of position, displacement, velocity, and acceleration defined in one dimension can be
expanded to two and three dimensions. Consider the Red Arrows, also known as the Royal Air Force Aerobatic team
of the United Kingdom. Each jet follows a unique curved trajectory in three-dimensional airspace, as well as has a
unique velocity and acceleration. Thus, to describe the motion of any of the jets accurately, we must assign to each
jet a unique position vector in three dimensions as well as a unique velocity and acceleration vector. We can apply
the same basic equations for displacement, velocity, and acceleration we derived in Motion Along a Straight Line to
describe the motion of the jets in two and three dimensions, but with some modifications—in particular, the
inclusion of vectors.
In this chapter we also explore two special types of motion in two dimensions: projectile motion and circular
motion. Last, we conclude with a discussion of relative motion. In the chapter-opening picture, each jet has a
relative motion with respect to any other jet in the group or to the people observing the air show on the ground.

148 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate position vectors in a multidimensional displacement problem.
• Solve for the displacement in two or three dimensions.
• Calculate the velocity vector given the position vector as a function of time.
• Calculate the average velocity in multiple dimensions.
Displacement and velocity in two or three dimensions are straightforward extensions of the one-dimensional
definitions. However, now they are vector quantities, so calculations with them have to follow the rules of vector
algebra, not scalar algebra.
Displacement Vector
To describe motion in two and three dimensions, we must first establish a coordinate system and a convention for
the axes. We generally use the coordinates x, y, and z to locate a particle at point P(x, y, z) in three dimensions. If the
particle is moving, the variables x, y, and z are functions of time (t):
4.1
The position vector from the origin of the coordinate system to point P is In unit vector notation, introduced in
Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector, is
4.2
Figure 4.2 shows the coordinate system and the vector to point P, where a particle could be located at a particular
time t. Note the orientation of the x, y, and z axes. This orientation is called a right-handed coordinate system
(Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector) and it is used throughout the chapter.
FIGURE 4.2 A three-dimensional coordinate system with a particle at position P(x(t), y(t), z(t)).
With our definition of the position of a particle in three-dimensional space, we can formulate the three-dimensional
displacement. Figure 4.3 shows a particle at time located at with position vector At a later time the
particle is located at with position vector . The displacement vector is found by subtracting from
4.3
Vector addition is discussed in Vectors. Note that this is the same operation we did in one dimension, but now the
vectors are in three-dimensional space.
Access for free at openstax.org

4.1 • Displacement and Velocity Vectors 149
FIGURE 4.3 The displacement is the vector from to .
The following examples illustrate the concept of displacement in multiple dimensions.
EXAMPLE 4.1
Polar Orbiting Satellite
A satellite is in a circular polar orbit around Earth at an altitude of 400 km—meaning, it passes directly overhead at
the North and South Poles. What is the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector from when it is directly
over the North Pole to when it is at latitude?
Strategy
We make a picture of the problem to visualize the solution graphically. This will aid in our understanding of the
displacement. We then use unit vectors to solve for the displacement.
Solution
Figure 4.4 shows the surface of Earth and a circle that represents the orbit of the satellite. Although satellites are
moving in three-dimensional space, they follow trajectories of ellipses, which can be graphed in two dimensions.
The position vectors are drawn from the center of Earth, which we take to be the origin of the coordinate system,
with the y-axis as north and the x-axis as east. The vector between them is the displacement of the satellite. We
take the radius of Earth as 6370 km, so the length of each position vector is 6770 km.