# REAL PDF — openstax_vol3.pdf, pages 360-366
############################################################

352 Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics
transitionfromthe (n+1) statetothenstateandemitsa
7.6The Quantum Tunneling of Particles
450-nm photon, what is its frequency?
through Potential Barriers
62. Vibrations of the hydrogen molecule H can be 69. Show that the wave function in (a) Equation 7.68
2
modeled as a simple harmonic oscillator with the spring satisfiesEquation7.61,and(b)Equation7.69satisfies
Equation 7.63.
constant k=1.13×10 3 N/m and mass
m=1.67×10 −27 kg. (a) What is the vibrational
70. A 6.0-eV electron impacts on a barrier with height
frequency of this molecule? (b) What are the energy and 11.0 eV. Find the probability of the electron to tunnel
the wavelength of the emitted photon when the molecule through the barrier if the barrier width is (a) 0.80 nm and
makes transition between its third and second excited (b) 0.40 nm.
states?
71. A 5.0-eV electron impacts on a barrier of with 0.60
63. A particle with mass 0.030 kg oscillates back-and- nm. Find the probability of the electron to tunnel through
forthonaspringwithfrequency4.0Hz.Attheequilibrium thebarrierifthebarrierheightis(a)7.0eV;(b)9.0eV;and
position, it has a speed of 0.60 m/s. If the particle is in a (c) 13.0 eV.
state of definite energy, find its energy quantum number.
72. A12.0-eVelectronencountersabarrierofheight15.0
64. Find the expectation value 〈 x 2〉 of the square eV.Iftheprobabilityoftheelectrontunnelingthroughthe
barrier is 2.5 %, find its width.
of the position for a quantum harmonic oscillator in the
ground state. Note: ∫ +∞ dxx 2e −a x 2 = π(2a 3/2 ) −1. 73. A quantum particle with initial kinetic energy 32.0
−∞ eV encounters a square barrier with height 41.0 eV and
width 0.25 nm. Find probability that the particle tunnels
65. Determine the expectation value of the potential throughthisbarrieriftheparticleis(a)anelectronand,(b)
energy for a quantum harmonic oscillator in the ground a proton.
state. Use this to calculate the expectation value of the
kinetic energy. 74. A simple model of a radioactive nuclear decay
assumes that α-particles are trapped inside a well of
66. Verify that ψ (x) given by Equation 7.57 is a nuclearpotentialthatwallsarethebarriersofafinitewidth
1
solution of Schrӧdinger’s equation for the quantum 2.0fmandheight30.0MeV.Findthetunnelingprobability
harmonic oscillator. across the potential barrier of the wall for α-particles
havingkineticenergy(a)29.0MeVand(b)20.0MeV.The
67. Estimate the ground state energy of the quantum mass of the α-particle is m=6.64×10 −27 kg.
harmonic oscillator by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle.
Startbyassumingthattheproductoftheuncertainties Δx
75. A muon, a quantum particle with a mass
and Δp isatitsminimum.Write Δp intermsof Δx and
approximately200timesthatofanelectron,isincidenton
assume that for the ground state x≈Δx and p≈Δp, a potential barrier of height 10.0 eV. The kinetic energy
oftheimpactingmuonis5.5eVandonlyabout0.10%of
then write the ground state energy in terms of x. Finally,
thesquaredamplitudeofitsincomingwavefunctionfilters
find the value of x that minimizes the energy and find the
through the barrier. What is the barrier’s width?
minimum of the energy.
76. Agrainofsandwithmass1.0mgandkineticenergy
68. A mass of 0.250 kg oscillates on a spring with the
1.0 J is incident on a potential energy barrier with height
forceconstant110N/m.Calculatethegroundenergylevel
1.000001Jandwidth2500nm.Howmanygrainsofsand
and the separation between the adjacent energy levels.
have to fall on this barrier before, on the average, one
Express the results in joules and in electron-volts. Are
passes through?
quantum effects important?
ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS
77. Showthatiftheuncertaintyinthepositionofaparticle its momentum.
is on the order of its de Broglie’s wavelength, then the
uncertaintyinitsmomentumisontheorderofthevalueof 78. The mass of a ρ-meson is measured to be
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics 353
770MeV/c2 with an uncertainty of 100MeV/c2. 84. Consideraninfinitesquarewellwithwallboundaries
Estimate the lifetime of this meson.
x=0 and x=L. Explain why the function
ψ(x)= Acoskx is not a solution to the stationary
79. A particle of mass m is confined to a box of width Schrӧdinger equation for the particle in a box.
L. If the particle is in the first excited state, what are the
probabilities of finding the particle in a region of width 85. Atoms in a crystal lattice vibrate in simple harmonic
0.020 L around the given point x: (a) x=0.25L; (b) motion. Assuming a lattice atom has a mass of
x=0.40L; (c) x=0.75L; and (d) x=0.90L. 9.4×10 −26 kg,whatistheforceconstantofthelatticeif
a lattice atom makes a transition from the ground state to
80. A particle in a box [0;L] is in the third excited state. first excited state when it absorbs a 525-µm photon?
What are its most probable positions?
86. A diatomic molecule behaves like a quantum
81. A0.20-kgbilliardballbouncesbackandforthwithout
harmonic oscillator with the force constant 12.0 N/m and
losing its energy between the cushions of a 1.5 m long
table.(a)Iftheballisinitsgroundstate,howmanyyears mass 5.60×10 −26 kg.(a)Whatisthewavelengthofthe
doesitneedtogetfromonecushiontotheother?Youmay emitted photon when the molecule makes the transition
compare this time interval to the age of the universe. (b) fromthethirdexcitedstatetothesecondexcitedstate?(b)
Howmuchenergyisrequiredtomaketheballgofromits Findthegroundstateenergyofvibrationsforthisdiatomic
ground state to its first excited state? Compare it with the molecule.
kinetic energy of the ball moving at 2.0 m/s.
87. Anelectronwithkineticenergy2.0MeVencountersa
82. Find the expectation value of the position squared potentialenergybarrierofheight16.0MeVandwidth2.00
whentheparticleintheboxisinitsthirdexcitedstateand nm.Whatistheprobabilitythattheelectronemergesonthe
the length of the box isL. other side of the barrier?
83. Consideraninfinitesquarewellwithwallboundaries 88. A beam of mono-energetic protons with energy 2.0
x=0 and x=L. Show that the function MeVfallsonapotentialenergybarrierofheight20.0MeV
ψ(x)= Asinkx is the solution to the stationary and of width 1.5 fm. What percentage of the beam is
transmitted through the barrier?
Schrӧdinger equation for the particle in a box only if
k= 2mE/ℏ. Explain why this is an acceptable wave
function only ifkis an integer multiple of π/L.
CHALLENGE PROBLEMS
89. Anelectroninalong,organicmoleculeusedinadye 91. IfSTMistodetectsurfacefeatureswithlocalheights
laser behaves approximately like a quantum particle in a of about 0.00200 nm, what percent change in tunneling-
boxwithwidth4.18nm.Findtheemittedphotonwhenthe electron current must the STM electronics be able to
electronmakesatransitionfromthefirstexcitedstatetothe detect? Assume that the tunneling-electron current has
ground state and from the second excited state to the first characteristics given in the preceding problem.
excited state.
92. UseHeisenberg’suncertaintyprincipletoestimatethe
90. InSTM,anelevationofthetipabovethesurfacebeing ground state energy of a particle oscillating on an spring
scannedcanbedeterminedwithagreatprecision,because with angular frequency, ω= k/m, where k is the spring
the tunneling-electron current between surface atoms and
constant andmis the mass.
theatomsofthetipisextremelysensitivetothevariationof
theseparationgapbetweenthemfrompointtopointalong
thesurface.Assumingthatthetunneling-electroncurrentis
93. Supposeaninfinitesquarewellextendsfrom −L/2 to
indirectproportiontothetunnelingprobabilityandthatthe +L/2.Solvethetime-independentSchrӧdinger’sequation
tunnelingprobabilityistoagoodapproximationexpressed to find the allowed energies and stationary states of a
by the exponential function e
−2βL
with β=10.0/nm,
particle with mass m that is confined to this well. Then
show that these solutions can be obtained by making the
determinetheratioofthetunnelingcurrentwhenthetipis coordinate transformation x′= x−L/2 for the solutions
0.500 nm above the surface to the current when the tip is
obtained for the well extending between 0 andL.
0.515 nm above the surface.

354 Chapter 7 | Quantum Mechanics
94. A particle ofmass m confined to a boxofwidth L is (whichistheexpectationvalueoftheposition).(b)Where
initsfirstexcitedstate ψ (x).(a)Finditsaverageposition is the particle most likely to be found?
2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 355
8 | ATOMIC STRUCTURE
Figure 8.1 NGC1763 is an emission nebula in the Large Magellanic Cloud, which is a satellite galaxy to our Milky Way
Galaxy. The colors we see can be explained by applying the ideas of quantum mechanics to atomic structure. (credit:
modification of work by NASA, ESA, and Josh Lake)
Chapter Outline
8.1The Hydrogen Atom
8.2Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment of the Electron
8.3Electron Spin
8.4The Exclusion Principle and the Periodic Table
8.5Atomic Spectra and X-rays
8.6Lasers
Introduction
Inthischapter,weusequantummechanicstostudythestructureandpropertiesofatoms.Thisstudyintroducesideasand
concepts that are necessary to understand more complex systems, such as molecules, crystals, and metals. As we deepen
ourunderstandingofatoms,webuildonthingswealreadyknow,suchasRutherford’snuclearmodeloftheatom,Bohr’s
model of the hydrogen atom, and de Broglie’s wave hypothesis.
Figure8.1isNGC1763,anemissionnebulainthesmallgalaxyknownastheLargeMagellanicCloud,whichisasatellite
oftheMilkyWayGalaxy.Ultravioletlightfromhotstarsionizesthehydrogenatomsinthenebula.Asprotonsandelectrons
recombine,radiationofdifferentfrequenciesisemitted.Thedetailsofthisprocesscanbecorrectlypredictedbyquantum
mechanics and are examined in this chapter.

356 Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure
8.1 | The Hydrogen Atom
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the hydrogen atom in terms of wave function, probability density, total energy, and
orbital angular momentum
• Identify the physical significance of each of the quantum numbers (n, l, m) of the hydrogen
atom
• Distinguish between the Bohr and Schrödinger models of the atom
• Use quantum numbers to calculate important information about the hydrogen atom
Thehydrogenatomisthesimplestatominnatureand,therefore,agoodstartingpointtostudyatomsandatomicstructure.
Thehydrogenatomconsistsofasinglenegativelychargedelectronthatmovesaboutapositivelychargedproton(Figure
8.2).InBohr’smodel,theelectronispulledaroundtheprotoninaperfectlycircularorbitbyanattractiveCoulombforce.
Theprotonisapproximately1800timesmoremassivethantheelectron,sotheprotonmovesverylittleinresponsetothe
forceontheprotonbytheelectron.(ThisisanalogoustotheEarth-Sunsystem,wheretheSunmovesverylittleinresponse
totheforceexertedonitbyEarth.)AnexplanationofthiseffectusingNewton’slawsisgiveninPhotons and Matter
Waves.
Figure 8.2 A representation of theBohr modelof the
hydrogen atom.
With the assumption of a fixed proton, we focus on the motion of the electron.
In the electric field of the proton, the potential energy of the electron is
e2 (8.1)
U(r)=−k r ,
where k=1/4πε andristhedistancebetweentheelectronandtheproton.Aswesawearlier,theforceonanobjectis
0
equaltothenegativeofthegradient(orslope)ofthepotentialenergyfunction.Forthespecialcaseofahydrogenatom,the
force between the electron and proton is an attractive Coulomb force.
Notice that the potential energyfunction U(r)doesnotvaryintime. Asaresult, Schrödinger’sequation ofthe hydrogen
atomreducestotwosimplerequations:onethatdependsonlyonspace(x,y,z)andanotherthatdependsonlyontime(t).
(Theseparationofawavefunctionintospace-andtime-dependentpartsfortime-independentpotentialenergyfunctionsis
discussed inQuantum Mechanics.) We are most interested in the space-dependent equation:
− 2m ℏ2 e ⎛ ⎝ ⎜ ∂ ∂ 2 x ψ 2 + ∂ ∂ 2 y ψ 2 + ∂ ∂ 2 z ψ 2 ⎞ ⎠ ⎟−k e r 2 ψ =Eψ, (8.2)
where ψ =ψ(x, y, z) isthethree-dimensionalwavefunctionoftheelectron, m
e
isthemassoftheelectron,andEisthe
totalenergyoftheelectron.Recallthatthetotalwavefunction Ψ(x, y, z, t), istheproductofthespace-dependentwave
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12067/1.9

Chapter 8 | Atomic Structure 357
function ψ =ψ(x, y, z) and the time-dependent wave function φ=φ(t).
Inadditiontobeingtime-independent,U(r)isalsosphericallysymmetrical.ThissuggeststhatwemaysolveSchrödinger’s
equation more easily if we express it in terms of the spherical coordinates (r,θ,ϕ) instead of rectangular coordinates
(x, y, z). A spherical coordinate system is shown in Figure 8.3. In spherical coordinates, the variable r is the radial
coordinate, θ isthepolarangle(relativetotheverticalz-axis),and ϕ istheazimuthalangle(relativetothex-axis).The
relationship between spherical and rectangular coordinates is x=rsinθcosϕ, y=rsinθsinϕ, z=rcosθ.
Figure 8.3 The relationship between the spherical and
rectangular coordinate systems.
The factor rsinθ is the magnitude of a vector formed by the projection of the polar vector onto the xy-plane. Also, the
coordinatesofxandyareobtainedbyprojectingthisvectorontothex-andy-axes,respectively.Theinversetransformation
gives
⎛ ⎞
r = x2+y2+z2, θ=cos−1⎛ ⎝r z⎞ ⎠ , ϕ=cos−1⎜ x ⎟.
⎝ x2+y2⎠
Schrödinger’s wave equation for the hydrogen atom in spherical coordinates is discussed in more advanced courses in
modern physics, so we do not consider it in detail here. However, due to the spherical symmetry of U(r), this equation
reducestothreesimplerequations:oneforeachofthethreecoordinates (r, θ, andϕ). Solutionstothetime-independent
wave function are written as a product of three functions:
ψ(r, θ, ϕ)=R(r)Θ(θ)Φ(ϕ),
where Risthe radial function dependent onthe radial coordinate ronly; Θ isthe polar function dependent onthe polar
coordinate θ only;and Φ isthephifunctionof ϕ only.ValidsolutionstoSchrödinger’sequation ψ(r, θ, ϕ) arelabeled
by the quantum numbersn,l, andm.
n: principal quantum number
l: angular momentum quantum number
m: angular momentum projection quantum number
(Thereasonsforthesenameswillbeexplainedinthenextsection.)TheradialfunctionRdependsonlyonnandl;thepolar
function Θ depends only on l and m; and the phi function Φ depends only on m. The dependence of each function on
quantum numbers is indicated with subscripts:
ψ nlm(r, θ, ϕ)=R nl(r)Θlm(θ)Φm(ϕ).
Not all sets of quantum numbers (n, l, m) are possible. For example, the orbital angular quantum number l can never be
greater or equal to the principal quantum number n(l<n). Specifically, we have