# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 93-99
############################################################

2.4 • Products of Vectors 81
FIGURE 2.32 (a) The diagram of the cyclic order of the unit vectors of the axes. (b) The only cross products where the unit vectors appear in
the cyclic order. These products have the positive sign. (c, d) Two examples of cross products where the unit vectors do not appear in the
cyclic order. These products have the negative sign.
Suppose we want to find the cross product for vectors and .
We can use the distributive property (Equation 2.37), the anticommutative property (Equation 2.36), and the results
in Equation 2.38 and Equation 2.39 for unit vectors to perform the following algebra:
When performing algebraic operations involving the cross product, be very careful about keeping the correct order
of multiplication because the cross product is anticommutative. The last two steps that we still have to do to
complete our task are, first, grouping the terms that contain a common unit vector and, second, factoring. In this
way we obtain the following very useful expression for the computation of the cross product:
2.40
In this expression, the scalar components of the cross-product vector are
2.41
When finding the cross product, in practice, we can use either Equation 2.35 or Equation 2.40, depending on which

82 2 • Vectors
one of them seems to be less complex computationally. They both lead to the same final result. One way to make
sure if the final result is correct is to use them both.
EXAMPLE 2.19
A Particle in a Magnetic Field
When moving in a magnetic field, some particles may experience a magnetic force. Without going into details—a
detailed study of magnetic phenomena comes in later chapters—let’s acknowledge that the magnetic field is a
vector, the magnetic force is a vector, and the velocity of the particle is a vector. The magnetic force vector is
proportional to the vector product of the velocity vector with the magnetic field vector, which we express as
. In this equation, a constant takes care of the consistency in physical units, so we can omit physical
units on vectors and . In this example, let’s assume the constant is positive.
A particle moving in space with velocity vector enters a region with a magnetic field and
experiences a magnetic force. Find the magnetic force on this particle at the entry point to the region where the
magnetic field vector is (a) and (b) . In each case, find magnitude F of the magnetic
force and angle the force vector makes with the given magnetic field vector .
Strategy
First, we want to find the vector product , because then we can determine the magnetic force using
. Magnitude F can be found either by using components, , or by computing the
magnitude directly using Equation 2.35. In the latter approach, we would have to find the angle between
vectors and . When we have , the general method for finding the direction angle involves the computation of
the scalar product and substitution into Equation 2.34. To compute the vector product we can either use
Equation 2.40 or compute the product directly, whichever way is simpler.
Solution
The components of the velocity vector are , , and .
(a) The components of the magnetic field vector are , , and . Substituting them into
Equation 2.41 gives the scalar components of vector :
Thus, the magnetic force is and its magnitude is
To compute angle , we may need to find the magnitude of the magnetic field vector,
and the scalar product :
Now, substituting into Equation 2.34 gives angle :
Access for free at openstax.org

2.4 • Products of Vectors 83
Hence, the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field vector. (We could have saved some time if
we had computed the scalar product earlier.)
(b) Because vector has only one component, we can perform the algebra quickly and find the vector
product directly:
The magnitude of the magnetic force is
Because the scalar product is
the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field vector .
Significance
Even without actually computing the scalar product, we can predict that the magnetic force vector must always be
perpendicular to the magnetic field vector because of the way this vector is constructed. Namely, the magnetic force
vector is the vector product and, by the definition of the vector product (see Figure 2.29), vector
must be perpendicular to both vectors and .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.16
Given two vectors and , find (a) , (b) , (c) the angle between and , and (d)
the angle between and vector .
In conclusion to this section, we want to stress that “dot product” and “cross product” are entirely different
mathematical objects that have different meanings. The dot product is a scalar; the cross product is a vector. Later
chapters use the terms dot product and scalar product interchangeably. Similarly, the terms cross product and
vector product are used interchangeably.

84 2 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
anticommutative property change in the order of system where location in a plane is given by polar
operation introduces the minus sign coordinates
antiparallel vectors two vectors with directions that polar coordinates a radial coordinate and an angle
differ by radial coordinate distance to the origin in a polar
associative terms can be grouped in any fashion coordinate system
commutative operations can be performed in any resultant vector vector sum of two (or more) vectors
order scalar a number, synonymous with a scalar quantity
component form of a vector a vector written as the in physics
vector sum of its components in terms of unit scalar component a number that multiplies a unit
vectors vector in a vector component of a vector
corkscrew right-hand rule a rule used to determine scalar equation equation in which the left-hand and
the direction of the vector product right-hand sides are numbers
cross product the result of the vector multiplication scalar product the result of the scalar multiplication
of vectors is a vector called a cross product; also of two vectors is a scalar called a scalar product;
called a vector product also called a dot product
difference of two vectors vector sum of the first scalar quantity quantity that can be specified
vector with the vector antiparallel to the second completely by a single number with an appropriate
direction angle in a plane, an angle between the physical unit
positive direction of the x-axis and the vector, tail-to-head geometric construction geometric
measured counterclockwise from the axis to the construction for drawing the resultant vector of
vector many vectors
displacement change in position unit vector vector of a unit magnitude that specifies
distributive multiplication can be distributed over direction; has no physical unit
terms in summation unit vectors of the axes unit vectors that define
dot product the result of the scalar multiplication of orthogonal directions in a plane or in space
two vectors is a scalar called a dot product; also vector mathematical object with magnitude and
called a scalar product direction
equal vectors two vectors are equal if and only if all vector components orthogonal components of a
their corresponding components are equal; vector; a vector is the vector sum of its vector
alternately, two parallel vectors of equal components.
magnitudes vector equation equation in which the left-hand and
magnitude length of a vector right-hand sides are vectors
null vector a vector with all its components equal to vector product the result of the vector multiplication
zero of vectors is a vector called a vector product; also
orthogonal vectors two vectors with directions that called a cross product
differ by exactly , synonymous with vector quantity physical quantity described by a
perpendicular vectors mathematical vector—that is, by specifying both its
parallel vectors two vectors with exactly the same magnitude and its direction; synonymous with a
direction angles vector in physics
parallelogram rule geometric construction of the vector sum resultant of the combination of two (or
vector sum in a plane more) vectors
polar coordinate system an orthogonal coordinate
Key Equations
Multiplication by a scalar (vector
equation)
Multiplication by a scalar (scalar
equation for magnitudes)
Resultant of two vectors
Access for free at openstax.org

2 • Chapter Review 85
Commutative law
Associative law
Distributive law
The component form of a vector in
two dimensions
Scalar components of a vector in
two dimensions
Magnitude of a vector in a plane
The direction angle of a vector in a
plane
Scalar components of a vector in a
plane
Polar coordinates in a plane
The component form of a vector in
three dimensions
The scalar z-component of a vector
in three dimensions
Magnitude of a vector in three
dimensions
Distributive property
Antiparallel vector to
Equal vectors
Components of the resultant of N
vectors
General unit vector
Definition of the scalar product
Commutative property of the scalar
product
Distributive property of the scalar
product
Scalar product in terms of scalar
components of vectors
Cosine of the angle between two
vectors
Dot products of unit vectors
Magnitude of the vector product
(definition)

86 2 • Chapter Review
Anticommutative property of the
vector product
Distributive property of the vector
product
Cross products of unit vectors
The cross product in terms of scalar
components of vectors
Summary
2.1 Scalars and Vectors to-head method.
• A vector quantity is any quantity that has 2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
magnitude and direction, such as displacement
• Vectors are described in terms of their
or velocity. Vector quantities are represented by
components in a coordinate system. In two
mathematical objects called vectors.
dimensions (in a plane), vectors have two
• Geometrically, vectors are represented by
components. In three dimensions (in space),
arrows, with the end marked by an arrowhead.
vectors have three components.
The length of the vector is its magnitude, which is
• A vector component of a vector is its part in an
a positive scalar. On a plane, the direction of a
axis direction. The vector component is the
vector is given by the angle the vector makes
product of the unit vector of an axis with its
with a reference direction, often an angle with
scalar component along this axis. A vector is the
the horizontal. The direction angle of a vector is a
resultant of its vector components.
scalar.
• Scalar components of a vector are differences of
• Two vectors are equal if and only if they have the
coordinates, where coordinates of the origin are
same magnitudes and directions. Parallel vectors
subtracted from end point coordinates of a
have the same direction angles but may have
vector. In a rectangular system, the magnitude of
different magnitudes. Antiparallel vectors have
a vector is the square root of the sum of the
direction angles that differ by . Orthogonal
squares of its components.
vectors have direction angles that differ by .
• In a plane, the direction of a vector is given by an
• When a vector is multiplied by a scalar, the result
angle the vector has with the positive x-axis. This
is another vector of a different length than the
direction angle is measured counterclockwise.
length of the original vector. Multiplication by a
The scalar x-component of a vector can be
positive scalar does not change the original
expressed as the product of its magnitude with
direction; only the magnitude is affected.
the cosine of its direction angle, and the scalar
Multiplication by a negative scalar reverses the
y-component can be expressed as the product of
original direction. The resulting vector is
its magnitude with the sine of its direction angle.
antiparallel to the original vector. Multiplication
• In a plane, there are two equivalent coordinate
by a scalar is distributive. Vectors can be divided
systems. The Cartesian coordinate system is
by nonzero scalars but cannot be divided by
defined by unit vectors and along the x-axis
vectors.
and the y-axis, respectively. The polar coordinate
• Two or more vectors can be added to form
system is defined by the radial unit vector ,
another vector. The vector sum is called the
which gives the direction from the origin, and a
resultant vector. We can add vectors to vectors or
unit vector , which is perpendicular (orthogonal)
scalars to scalars, but we cannot add scalars to
to the radial direction.
vectors. Vector addition is commutative and
associative. 2.3 Algebra of Vectors
• To construct a resultant vector of two vectors in a
• Analytical methods of vector algebra allow us to
plane geometrically, we use the parallelogram
find resultants of sums or differences of vectors
rule. To construct a resultant vector of many
without having to draw them. Analytical methods
vectors in a plane geometrically, we use the tail-
of vector addition are exact, contrary to graphical
Access for free at openstax.org