# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 218-225
############################################################

206 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
(the mower is moving only horizontally). The acceleration found is small enough to be reasonable for a person
pushing a mower. Such an effort would not last too long, because the person’s top speed would soon be reached.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.3
At the time of its launch, the HMS Titanic was the most massive mobile object ever built, with a mass of
. If a force of 6 MN was applied to the ship, what acceleration would it experience?
In the preceding example, we dealt with net force only for simplicity. However, several forces act on the lawn
mower. The weight (discussed in detail in Mass and Weight) pulls down on the mower, toward the center of Earth;
this produces a contact force on the ground. The ground must exert an upward force on the lawn mower, known as
the normal force , which we define in Common Forces. These forces are balanced and therefore do not produce
vertical acceleration. In the next example, we show both of these forces. As you continue to solve problems using
Newton’s second law, be sure to show multiple forces.
EXAMPLE 5.3
Which Force Is Bigger?
(a) The car shown in Figure 5.13 is moving at a constant speed. Which force is bigger, or ? Explain.
(b) The same car is now accelerating to the right. Which force is bigger, or Explain.
FIGURE 5.13 A car is shown (a) moving at constant speed and (b) accelerating. How do the forces acting on the car compare in each case?
(a) What does the knowledge that the car is moving at constant velocity tell us about the net horizontal force on the car compared to the
friction force? (b) What does the knowledge that the car is accelerating tell us about the horizontal force on the car compared to the friction
force?
Strategy
We must consider Newton’s first and second laws to analyze the situation. We need to decide which law applies;
this, in turn, will tell us about the relationship between the forces.
Solution
a. The forces are equal. According to Newton’s first law, if the net force is zero, the velocity is constant.
b. In this case, must be larger than According to Newton’s second law, a net force is required to
cause acceleration.
Significance
These questions may seem trivial, but they are commonly answered incorrectly. For a car or any other object to
Access for free at openstax.org

5.3 • Newton's Second Law 207
move, it must be accelerated from rest to the desired speed; this requires that the friction force be greater than the
drag force. Once the car is moving at constant velocity, the net force must be zero; otherwise, the car will accelerate
(gain speed). To solve problems involving Newton’s laws, we must understand whether to apply Newton’s first law
(where ) or Newton’s second law (where is not zero). This will be apparent as you see more
examples and attempt to solve problems on your own.
EXAMPLE 5.4
What Rocket Thrust Accelerates This Sled?
Before space flights carrying astronauts, rocket sleds were used to test aircraft, missile equipment, and
physiological effects on human subjects at high speeds. They consisted of a platform that was mounted on one or
two rails and propelled by several rockets.
Calculate the magnitude of force exerted by each rocket, called its thrust T, for the four-rocket propulsion system
shown in Figure 5.14. The sled’s initial acceleration is , the mass of the system is 2100 kg, and the force of
friction opposing the motion is 650 N.
FIGURE 5.14 A sled experiences a rocket thrust that accelerates it to the right. Each rocket creates an identical thrust T. The system here is
the sled, its rockets, and its rider, so none of the forces between these objects are considered. The arrow representing friction is drawn
larger than scale.
Strategy
Although forces are acting both vertically and horizontally, we assume the vertical forces cancel because there is no
vertical acceleration. This leaves us with only horizontal forces and a simpler one-dimensional problem. Directions
are indicated with plus or minus signs, with right taken as the positive direction. See the free-body diagram in Figure
5.14.
Solution
Since acceleration, mass, and the force of friction are given, we start with Newton’s second law and look for ways to
find the thrust of the engines. We have defined the direction of the force and acceleration as acting “to the right,” so
we need to consider only the magnitudes of these quantities in the calculations. Hence we begin with

208 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
where is the net force along the horizontal direction. We can see from the figure that the engine thrusts add,
whereas friction opposes the thrust. In equation form, the net external force is
Substituting this into Newton’s second law gives us
Using a little algebra, we solve for the total thrust 4T:
Substituting known values yields
Therefore, the total thrust is
and the individual thrusts are
Significance
The numbers are quite large, so the result might surprise you. Experiments such as this were performed in the early
1960s to test the limits of human endurance, and the setup was designed to protect human subjects in jet fighter
emergency ejections. Speeds of 1000 km/h were obtained, with accelerations of 45 g’s. (Recall that g, acceleration
due to gravity, is . When we say that acceleration is 45 g’s, it is which is approximately
.) Although living subjects are not used anymore, land speeds of 10,000 km/h have been obtained with a
rocket sled.
In this example, as in the preceding one, the system of interest is obvious. We see in later examples that choosing
the system of interest is crucial—and the choice is not always obvious.
Newton’s second law is more than a definition; it is a relationship among acceleration, force, and mass. It can help
us make predictions. Each of those physical quantities can be defined independently, so the second law tells us
something basic and universal about nature.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.4
A 550-kg sports car collides with a 2200-kg truck, and during the collision, the net force on each vehicle is the force
exerted by the other. If the magnitude of the truck’s acceleration is what is the magnitude of the sports
car’s acceleration?
Component Form of Newton’s Second Law
We have developed Newton’s second law and presented it as a vector equation in Equation 5.3. This vector equation
can be written as three component equations:
5.5
The second law is a description of how a body responds mechanically to its environment. The influence of the
environment is the net force the body’s response is the acceleration and the strength of the response is
inversely proportional to the mass m. The larger the mass of an object, the smaller its response (its acceleration) to
the influence of the environment (a given net force). Therefore, a body’s mass is a measure of its inertia, as we
explained in Newton’s First Law.
Access for free at openstax.org

5.3 • Newton's Second Law 209
EXAMPLE 5.5
Force on a Soccer Ball
A 0.400-kg soccer ball is kicked across the field by a player; it undergoes acceleration given by
Find (a) the resultant force acting on the ball and (b) the magnitude and direction of the
resultant force.
Strategy
The vectors in and format, which indicate force direction along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively, are
involved, so we apply Newton’s second law in vector form.
Solution
a. We apply Newton’s second law:
b. Magnitude and direction are found using the components of :
Significance
We must remember that Newton’s second law is a vector equation. In (a), we are multiplying a vector by a scalar to
determine the net force in vector form. While the vector form gives a compact representation of the force vector, it
does not tell us how “big” it is, or where it goes, in intuitive terms. In (b), we are determining the actual size
(magnitude) of this force and the direction in which it travels.
EXAMPLE 5.6
Mass of a Car
Find the mass of a car if a net force of produces an acceleration of .
Strategy
Vector division is not defined, so cannot be performed. However, mass m is a scalar, so we can use the
scalar form of Newton’s second law, .
Solution
We use and substitute the magnitudes of the two vectors: and Therefore,
Significance
Force and acceleration were given in the and format, but the answer, mass m, is a scalar and thus is not given in
and form.
EXAMPLE 5.7
Several Forces on a Particle
A particle of mass is acted upon by four forces of magnitudes.
, with the directions as shown in the free-body diagram in
Figure 5.15. What is the acceleration of the particle?

210 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.15 Four forces in the xy-plane are applied to a 4.0-kg particle.
Strategy
Because this is a two-dimensional problem, we must use a free-body diagram. First, must be resolved into x-
and y-components. We can then apply the second law in each direction.
Solution
We draw a free-body diagram as shown in Figure 5.15. Now we apply Newton’s second law. We consider all vectors
resolved into x- and y-components:
Thus, the net acceleration is
which is a vector of magnitude directed at to the positive x-axis.
Significance
Numerous examples in everyday life can be found that involve three or more forces acting on a single object, such as
cables running from the Golden Gate Bridge or a football player being tackled by three defenders. We can see that
the solution of this example is just an extension of what we have already done.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.5
A car has forces acting on it, as shown below. The mass of the car is 1000.0 kg. The road is slick, so friction can be
ignored. (a) What is the net force on the car? (b) What is the acceleration of the car?
Access for free at openstax.org

5.3 • Newton's Second Law 211
Newton’s Second Law and Momentum
Newton actually stated his second law in terms of momentum: “The instantaneous rate at which a body’s
momentum changes is equal to the net force acting on the body.” (“Instantaneous rate” implies that the derivative is
involved.) This can be given by the vector equation
5.6
This means that Newton’s second law addresses the central question of motion: What causes a change in motion of
an object? Momentum was described by Newton as “quantity of motion,” a way of combining both the velocity of an
object and its mass. We devote Linear Momentum and Collisions to the study of momentum.
For now, it is sufficient to define momentum as the product of the mass of the object m and its velocity :
5.7
Since velocity is a vector, so is momentum.
It is easy to visualize momentum. A train moving at 10 m/s has more momentum than one that moves at 2 m/s. In
everyday life, we speak of one sports team as “having momentum” when they score points against the opposing
team.
If we substitute Equation 5.7 into Equation 5.6, we obtain
When m is constant, we have
Thus, we see that the momentum form of Newton’s second law reduces to the form given earlier in this section.
INTERACTIVE
Explore the forces at work (https://openstax.org/l/21forcesatwork) when pulling a cart (https://openstax.org/l/
21pullacart) or pushing a refrigerator, crate, or person. Put an object on a ramp (https://openstax.org/l/21ramp) and
see how it affects its motion. Engage the simulation below and see how applied forces make objects move.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/l/21forcemotion)

212 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
5.4 Mass and Weight
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between mass and weight
• Explain why objects falling through the air are never truly in free fall
• Describe the concept of weightlessness
Mass and weight are often used interchangeably in everyday conversation. For example, our medical records often
show our weight in kilograms but never in the correct units of newtons. In physics, however, there is an important
distinction. Weight is the pull of Earth on an object. It depends on the distance from the center of Earth. Unlike
weight, mass does not vary with location. The mass of an object is the same on Earth, in orbit, or on the surface of
the Moon.
Units of Force
The equation is used to define net force in terms of mass, length, and time. As explained earlier, the SI
unit of force is the newton. Since
Although almost the entire world uses the newton for the unit of force, in the United States, the most familiar unit of
force is the pound (lb), where 1 N = 0.225 lb. Thus, a 225-lb person weighs 1000 N.
Weight and Gravitational Force
When an object is dropped, it accelerates toward the center of Earth. Newton’s second law says that a net force on
an object is responsible for its acceleration. If air resistance is negligible, the net force on a falling object is the
gravitational force, commonly called its weight , or its force due to gravity acting on an object of mass m. Weight
can be denoted as a vector because it has a direction; down is, by definition, the direction of gravity, and hence,
weight is a downward force. The magnitude of weight is denoted as w. Galileo was instrumental in showing that, in
the absence of air resistance, all objects fall with the same acceleration g. Using Galileo’s result and Newton’s
second law, we can derive an equation for weight.
Consider an object with mass m falling toward Earth. It experiences only the downward force of gravity, which is the
weight . Newton’s second law says that the magnitude of the net external force on an object is We
know that the acceleration of an object due to gravity is or . Substituting these into Newton’s second law
gives us the following equations.
WEIGHT
The gravitational force on a mass is its weight. We can write this in vector form, where is weight and m is
mass, as
5.8
In scalar form, we can write
5.9
Since on Earth, the weight of a 1.00-kg object on Earth is 9.80 N:
When the net external force on an object is its weight, we say that it is in free fall, that is, the only force acting on the
object is gravity. However, when objects on Earth fall downward through the air, they are never truly in free fall
because there is always some upward resistance force from the air acting on the object.
Acceleration due to gravity g varies slightly over the surface of Earth, so the weight of an object depends on its
location and is not an intrinsic property of the object. Weight varies dramatically if we leave Earth’s surface. On the
Access for free at openstax.org