# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 373-378
############################################################

8.4 • Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability 361
either side of an equilibrium point has a direction that is the same as the direction of position change, pointing away
from the equilibrium point, the equilibrium is termed unstable, and this implies that U(x) has a relative maximum
there.
EXAMPLE 8.10
Quartic and Quadratic Potential Energy Diagram
The potential energy for a particle undergoing one-dimensional motion along the x-axis is
where U is in joules and x is in meters. The particle is not subject to any non-conservative forces and its mechanical
energy is constant at . (a) Is the motion of the particle confined to any regions on the x-axis, and if so,
what are they? (b) Are there any equilibrium points, and if so, where are they and are they stable or unstable?
Strategy
First, we need to graph the potential energy as a function of x. The function is zero at the origin, becomes negative
as x increases in the positive or negative directions ( is larger than for ), and then becomes positive at
sufficiently large . Your graph should look like a double potential well, with the zeros determined by solving the
equation , and the extremes determined by examining the first and second derivatives of U(x), as shown in
Figure 8.12.
FIGURE 8.12 The potential energy graph for a one-dimensional, quartic and quadratic potential energy, with various quantities indicated.
You can find the values of (a) the allowed regions along the x-axis, for the given value of the mechanical energy, from
the condition that the kinetic energy can’t be negative, and (b) the equilibrium points and their stability from the
properties of the force (stable for a relative minimum and unstable for a relative maximum of potential energy).
You can just eyeball the graph to reach qualitative answers to the questions in this example. That, after all, is the
value of potential energy diagrams. You can see that there are two allowed regions for the motion and
three equilibrium points (slope of which the central one is unstable and the other
two are stable
Solution
a. To find the allowed regions for x, we use the condition

362 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
If we complete the square in , this condition simplifies to which we can solve to obtain
This represents two allowed regions, and where and
(in meters).
b. To find the equilibrium points, we solve the equation
and find and , where (meters). The second derivative
is negative at , so that position is a relative maximum and the equilibrium there is unstable. The second
derivative is positive at , so these positions are relative minima and represent stable equilibria.
Significance
The particle in this example can oscillate in the allowed region about either of the two stable equilibrium points we
found, but it does not have enough energy to escape from whichever potential well it happens to initially be in. The
conservation of mechanical energy and the relations between kinetic energy and speed, and potential energy and
force, enable you to deduce much information about the qualitative behavior of the motion of a particle, as well as
some quantitative information, from a graph of its potential energy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.10
Repeat Example 8.10 when the particle’s mechanical energy is
Before ending this section, let’s practice applying the method based on the potential energy of a particle to find its
position as a function of time, for the one-dimensional, mass-spring system considered earlier in this section.
EXAMPLE 8.11
Sinusoidal Oscillations
Find x(t) for a particle moving with a constant mechanical energy and a potential energy ,
when the particle starts from rest at time .
Strategy
We follow the same steps as we did in Example 8.9. Substitute the potential energy U into Equation 8.14 and factor
out the constants, like m or k. Integrate the function and solve the resulting expression for position, which is now a
function of time.
Solution
Substitute the potential energy in Equation 8.14 and integrate using an integral solver found on a web search:
From the initial conditions at the initial kinetic energy is zero and the initial potential energy is
from which you can see that and Now you can solve for x:
Access for free at openstax.org

8.5 • Sources of Energy 363
Significance
A few paragraphs earlier, we referred to this mass-spring system as an example of a harmonic oscillator. Here, we
anticipate that a harmonic oscillator executes sinusoidal oscillations with a maximum displacement of
(called the amplitude) and a rate of oscillation of (called the frequency). Further discussions about
oscillations can be found in Oscillations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.11
Find for the mass-spring system in Example 8.11 if the particle starts from at What is the
particle’s initial velocity?
8.5 Sources of Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe energy transformations and conversions in general terms
• Explain what it means for an energy source to be renewable or nonrenewable
In this chapter, we have studied energy. We learned that energy can take different forms and can be transferred
from one form to another. You will find that energy is discussed in many everyday, as well as scientific, contexts,
because it is involved in all physical processes. It will also become apparent that many situations are best
understood, or most easily conceptualized, by considering energy. So far, no experimental results have contradicted
the conservation of energy. In fact, whenever measurements have appeared to conflict with energy conservation,
new forms of energy have been discovered or recognized in accordance with this principle.
What are some other forms of energy? Many of these are covered in later chapters (also see Figure 8.13), but let’s
detail a few here:
• Atoms and molecules inside all objects are in random motion. The internal kinetic energy from these random
motions is called thermal energy, because it is related to the temperature of the object. In this case, the
energy is known as heat energy.
• Electrical energy is a common form that is converted to many other forms and does work in a wide range of
practical situations.
• Fuels, such as gasoline and food, have chemical energy, which is potential energy arising from their molecular
structure. Chemical energy can be converted into thermal energy by reactions like oxidation. Chemical
reactions can also produce electrical energy, such as in batteries. Electrical energy can, in turn, produce
thermal energy and light, such as in an electric heater or a light bulb.
• Light is just one kind of electromagnetic radiation, or radiant energy, which also includes radio, infrared,
ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays. All bodies with thermal energy can radiate energy in electromagnetic
waves.
• Nuclear energy comes from reactions and processes that convert measurable amounts of mass into energy.
Nuclear energy is transformed into radiant energy in the Sun, into thermal energy in the boilers of nuclear
power plants, and then into electrical energy in the generators of power plants. These and all other forms of
energy can be transformed into one another and, to a certain degree, can be converted into mechanical work.

364 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
FIGURE 8.13 Energy that we use in society takes many forms, which be converted from one into another depending on the process
involved. We will study many of these forms of energy in later chapters in this text. (credit “sun”: modification of work by EIT - SOHO
Consortium, ESA, NASA credit “solar panels”: “modification of work by “kjkolb”/Wikimedia Commons; credit “gas burner”: modification of
work by Steven Depolo)
The transformation of energy from one form into another happens all the time. The chemical energy in food is
converted into thermal energy through metabolism; light energy is converted into chemical energy through
photosynthesis. Another example of energy conversion occurs in a solar cell. Sunlight impinging on a solar cell
produces electricity, which can be used to run electric motors or heat water. In an example encompassing many
steps, the chemical energy contained in coal is converted into thermal energy as it burns in a furnace, to transform
water into steam, in a boiler. Some of the thermal energy in the steam is then converted into mechanical energy as it
expands and spins a turbine, which is connected to a generator to produce electrical energy. In these examples, not
all of the initial energy is converted into the forms mentioned, because some energy is always transferred to the
environment.
Energy is an important element at all levels of society. We live in a very interdependent world, and access to
adequate and reliable energy resources is crucial for economic growth and for maintaining the quality of our lives.
The principal energy resources used in the world are shown in Figure 8.14. The figure distinguishes between two
major types of energy sources: renewable and non-renewable, and further divides each type into a few more
specific kinds. Renewable sources are energy sources that are replenished through naturally occurring, ongoing
processes, on a time scale that is much shorter than the anticipated lifetime of the civilization using the source.
Non-renewable sources are depleted once some of the energy they contain is extracted and converted into other
kinds of energy. The natural processes by which non-renewable sources are formed typically take place over
geological time scales.
Access for free at openstax.org

8.5 • Sources of Energy 365
FIGURE 8.14 World energy consumption by source; the percentage of renewables is increasing, accounting for 19% in 2012.
Our most important non-renewable energy sources are fossil fuels, such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas. These
account for about 81% of the world’s energy consumption, as shown in the figure. Burning fossil fuels creates
chemical reactions that transform potential energy, in the molecular structures of the reactants, into thermal energy
and products. This thermal energy can be used to heat buildings or to operate steam-driven machinery. Internal
combustion and jet engines convert some of the energy of rapidly expanding gases, released from burning gasoline,
into mechanical work. Electrical power generation is mostly derived from transferring energy in expanding steam,
via turbines, into mechanical work, which rotates coils of wire in magnetic fields to generate electricity. Nuclear
energy is the other non-renewable source shown in Figure 8.14 and supplies about 3% of the world’s consumption.
Nuclear reactions release energy by transforming potential energy, in the structure of nuclei, into thermal energy,
analogous to energy release in chemical reactions. The thermal energy obtained from nuclear reactions can be
transferred and converted into other forms in the same ways that energy from fossil fuels are used.
An unfortunate byproduct of relying on energy produced from the combustion of fossil fuels is the release of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere and its contribution to global warming. Nuclear energy poses environmental problems
as well, including the safety and disposal of nuclear waste. Besides these important consequences, reserves of non-
renewable sources of energy are limited and, given the rapidly growing rate of world energy consumption, may not
last for more than a few hundred years. Considerable effort is going on to develop and expand the use of renewable
sources of energy, involving a significant percentage of the world’s physicists and engineers.
Four of the renewable energy sources listed in Figure 8.14—those using material from plants as fuel (biomass heat,
ethanol, biodiesel, and biomass electricity)—involve the same types of energy transformations and conversions as
just discussed for fossil and nuclear fuels. The other major types of renewable energy sources are hydropower, wind
power, geothermal power, and solar power.
Hydropower is produced by converting the gravitational potential energy of falling or flowing water into kinetic
energy and then into work to run electric generators or machinery. Converting the mechanical energy in ocean
surface waves and tides is in development. Wind power also converts kinetic energy into work, which can be used
directly to generate electricity, operate mills, and propel sailboats.
The interior of Earth has a great deal of thermal energy, part of which is left over from its original formation
(gravitational potential energy converted into thermal energy) and part of which is released from radioactive
minerals (a form of natural nuclear energy). It will take a very long time for this geothermal energy to escape into
space, so people generally regard it as a renewable source, when actually, it’s just inexhaustible on human time
scales.
The source of solar power is energy carried by the electromagnetic waves radiated by the Sun. Most of this energy is
carried by visible light and infrared (heat) radiation. When suitable materials absorb electromagnetic waves, radiant
energy is converted into thermal energy, which can be used to heat water, or when concentrated, to make steam and