# OpenStax Vol.1 Mechanics — REAL PDF, pages 647-652
############################################################

13.6 • Tidal Forces 635
FIGURE 13.26 Dramatic evidence of tidal forces can be seen on Io. The eruption seen in blue is due to the internal heat created by the tidal
forces exerted on Io by Jupiter. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL/University of Arizona)
For some stars, the effect of tidal forces can be catastrophic. The tidal forces in very close binary systems can be
strong enough to rip matter from one star to the other, once the tidal forces exceed the cohesive self-gravitational
forces that hold the stars together. This effect can be seen in normal stars that orbit nearby compact stars, such as
neutron stars or black holes. Figure 13.27 shows an artist’s rendition of this process. As matter falls into the
compact star, it forms an accretion disc that becomes super-heated and radiates in the X-ray spectrum.
FIGURE 13.27 Tidal forces from a compact object can tear matter away from an orbiting star. In addition to the accretion disc orbiting the
compact object, material is often ejected along relativistic jets as shown. (credit: modification of work by ESO/L. Calçada/M. Kornmesser)
The energy output of these binary systems can exceed the typical output of thousands of stars. Another example
might be a quasar. Quasars are very distant and immensely bright objects, often exceeding the energy output of
entire galaxies. It is the general consensus among astronomers that they are, in fact, massive black holes producing
radiant energy as matter that has been tidally ripped from nearby stars falls into them.

636 13 • Gravitation
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how the theory of general relativity approaches gravitation
• Explain the principle of equivalence
• Calculate the Schwarzschild radius of an object
• Summarize the evidence for black holes
Newton’s law of universal gravitation accurately predicts much of what we see within our solar system. Indeed, only
Newton’s laws have been needed to accurately send every space vehicle on its journey. The paths of Earth-crossing
asteroids, and most other celestial objects, can be accurately determined solely with Newton’s laws. Nevertheless,
many phenomena have shown a discrepancy from what Newton’s laws predict, including the orbit of Mercury and
the effect that gravity has on light. In this section, we examine a different way of envisioning gravitation.
A Revolution in Perspective
In 1905, Albert Einstein published his theory of special relativity. This theory is discussed in great detail in Relativity
(http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction), so we say only a few words here. In
this theory, no motion can exceed the speed of light—it is the speed limit of the Universe. This simple fact has been
verified in countless experiments. However, it has incredible consequences—space and time are no longer absolute.
Two people moving relative to one another do not agree on the length of objects or the passage of time. Almost all of
the mechanics you learned in previous chapters, while remarkably accurate even for speeds of many thousands of
miles per second, begin to fail when approaching the speed of light.
This speed limit on the Universe was also a challenge to the inherent assumption in Newton’s law of gravitation that
gravity is an action-at-a-distance force. That is, without physical contact, any change in the position of one mass is
instantly communicated to all other masses. This assumption does not come from any first principle, as Newton’s
theory simply does not address the question. (The same was believed of electromagnetic forces, as well. It is fair to
say that most scientists were not completely comfortable with the action-at-a-distance concept.)
A second assumption also appears in Newton’s law of gravitation Equation 13.1. The masses are assumed to be
exactly the same as those used in Newton’s second law, . We made that assumption in many of our
derivations in this chapter. Again, there is no underlying principle that this must be, but experimental results are
consistent with this assumption. In Einstein’s subsequent theory of general relativity (1916), both of these issues
were addressed. His theory was a theory of space-time geometry and how mass (and acceleration) distort and
interact with that space-time. It was not a theory of gravitational forces. The mathematics of the general theory is
beyond the scope of this text, but we can look at some underlying principles and their consequences.
The Principle of Equivalence
Einstein came to his general theory in part by wondering why someone who was free falling did not feel their weight.
Indeed, it is common to speak of astronauts orbiting Earth as being weightless, despite the fact that Earth’s gravity
is still quite strong there. In Einstein’s general theory, there is no difference between free fall and being weightless.
This is called the principle of equivalence. The equally surprising corollary to this is that there is no difference
between a uniform gravitational field and a uniform acceleration in the absence of gravity. Let’s focus on this last
statement. Although a perfectly uniform gravitational field is not feasible, we can approximate it very well.
Within a reasonably sized laboratory on Earth, the gravitational field is essentially uniform. The corollary states
that any physical experiments performed there have the identical results as those done in a laboratory accelerating
at in deep space, well away from all other masses. Figure 13.28 illustrates the concept.
Access for free at openstax.org

13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity 637
FIGURE 13.28 According to the principle of equivalence, the results of all experiments performed in a laboratory in a uniform gravitational
field are identical to the results of the same experiments performed in a uniformly accelerating laboratory.
How can these two apparently fundamentally different situations be the same? The answer is that gravitation is not
a force between two objects but is the result of each object responding to the effect that the other has on the space-
time surrounding it. A uniform gravitational field and a uniform acceleration have exactly the same effect on space-
time.
A Geometric Theory of Gravity
Euclidian geometry assumes a “flat” space in which, among the most commonly known attributes, a straight line is
the shortest distance between two points, the sum of the angles of all triangles must be 180 degrees, and parallel
lines never intersect. Non-Euclidean geometry was not seriously investigated until the nineteenth century, so it is
not surprising that Euclidean space is inherently assumed in all of Newton’s laws.
The general theory of relativity challenges this long-held assumption. Only empty space is flat. The presence of
mass—or energy, since relativity does not distinguish between the two—distorts or curves space and time, or space-
time, around it. The motion of any other mass is simply a response to this curved space-time. Figure 13.29 is a two-
dimensional representation of a smaller mass orbiting in response to the distorted space created by the presence of
a larger mass. In a more precise but confusing picture, we would also see space distorted by the orbiting mass, and
both masses would be in motion in response to the total distortion of space. Note that the figure is a representation
to help visualize the concept. These are distortions in our three-dimensional space and time. We do not see them as
we would a dimple on a ball. We see the distortion only by careful measurements of the motion of objects and light
as they move through space.

638 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.29 A smaller mass orbiting in the distorted space-time of a larger mass. In fact, all mass or energy distorts space-time.
For weak gravitational fields, the results of general relativity do not differ significantly from Newton’s law of
gravitation. But for intense gravitational fields, the results diverge, and general relativity has been shown to predict
the correct results. Even in our Sun’s relatively weak gravitational field at the distance of Mercury’s orbit, we can
observe the effect. Starting in the mid-1800s, Mercury’s elliptical orbit has been carefully measured. However,
although it is elliptical, its motion is complicated by the fact that the perihelion position of the ellipse slowly
advances. Most of the advance is due to the gravitational pull of other planets, but a small portion of that
advancement could not be accounted for by Newton’s law. At one time, there was even a search for a “companion”
planet that would explain the discrepancy. But general relativity correctly predicts the measurements. Since then,
many measurements, such as the deflection of light of distant objects by the Sun, have verified that general
relativity correctly predicts the observations.
We close this discussion with one final comment. We have often referred to distortions of space-time or distortions
in both space and time. In both special and general relativity, the dimension of time has equal footing with each
spatial dimension (differing in its place in both theories only by an ultimately unimportant scaling factor). Near a
very large mass, not only is the nearby space “stretched out,” but time is dilated or “slowed.” We discuss these
effects more in the next section.
Black Holes
Einstein’s theory of gravitation is expressed in one deceptively simple-looking tensor equation (tensors are a
generalization of scalars and vectors), which expresses how a mass determines the curvature of space-time around
it. The solutions to that equation yield one of the most fascinating predictions: the black hole. The prediction is that
if an object is sufficiently dense, it will collapse in upon itself and be surrounded by an event horizon from which
nothing can escape. The name “black hole,” which was coined by astronomer John Wheeler in 1969, refers to the
fact that light cannot escape such an object. Karl Schwarzschild was the first person to note this phenomenon in
1916, but at that time, it was considered mostly to be a mathematical curiosity.
Surprisingly, the idea of a massive body from which light cannot escape dates back to the late 1700s.
Independently, John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace used Newton’s law of gravitation to show that light leaving
the surface of a star with enough mass could not escape. Their work was based on the fact that the speed of light
had been measured by Ole Rømer in 1676. He noted discrepancies in the data for the orbital period of the moon Io
Access for free at openstax.org

13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity 639
about Jupiter. Rømer realized that the difference arose from the relative positions of Earth and Jupiter at different
times and that he could find the speed of light from that difference. Michell and Laplace both realized that since light
had a finite speed, there could be a star massive enough that the escape speed from its surface could exceed that
speed. Hence, light always would fall back to the star. Oddly, observers far enough away from the very largest stars
would not be able to see them, yet they could see a smaller star from the same distance.
Recall that in Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy, we found that the escape speed, given by Equation
13.6, is independent of the mass of the object escaping. Even though the nature of light was not fully understood at
the time, the mass of light, if it had any, was not relevant. Hence, Equation 13.6 should be valid for light. Substituting
c, the speed of light, for the escape velocity, we have
Thus, we only need values for R and M such that the escape velocity exceeds c, and then light will not be able to
escape. Michell posited that if a star had the density of our Sun and a radius that extended just beyond the orbit of
Mars, then light would not be able to escape from its surface. He also conjectured that we would still be able to
detect such a star from the gravitational effect it would have on objects around it. This was an insightful conclusion,
as this is precisely how we infer the existence of such objects today. While we have yet to, and may never, visit a
black hole, the circumstantial evidence for them has become so compelling that few astronomers doubt their
existence.
Before we examine some of that evidence, we turn our attention back to Schwarzschild’s solution to the tensor
equation from general relativity. In that solution arises a critical radius, now called the Schwarzschild radius .
For any mass M, if that mass were compressed to the extent that its radius becomes less than the Schwarzschild
radius, then the mass will collapse to a singularity, and anything that passes inside that radius cannot escape. Once
inside , the arrow of time takes all things to the singularity. (In a broad mathematical sense, a singularity is where
the value of a function goes to infinity. In this case, it is a point in space of zero volume with a finite mass. Hence, the
mass density and gravitational energy become infinite.) The Schwarzschild radius is given by
13.12
If you look at our escape velocity equation with , you will notice that it gives precisely this result. But that is
merely a fortuitous accident caused by several incorrect assumptions. One of these assumptions is the use of the
incorrect classical expression for the kinetic energy for light. Just how dense does an object have to be in order to
turn into a black hole?
EXAMPLE 13.15
Calculating the Schwarzschild Radius
Calculate the Schwarzschild radius for both the Sun and Earth. Compare the density of the nucleus of an atom to the
density required to compress Earth’s mass uniformly to its Schwarzschild radius. The density of a nucleus is about
.
Strategy
We use Equation 13.12 for this calculation. We need only the masses of Earth and the Sun, which we obtain from the
astronomical data given in Appendix D.
Solution
Substituting the mass of the Sun, we have