# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 433-444
############################################################

9.6 • Center of Mass 421
As a result of this fractional force, the momentum of each particle gets changed:
9.21
The net force on the object is the vector sum of these forces:
9.22
This net force changes the momentum of the object as a whole, and the net change of momentum of the object
must be the vector sum of all the individual changes of momentum of all of the particles:
9.23
Combining Equation 9.22 and Equation 9.23 gives
9.24
Let’s now think about these summations. First consider the internal forces term; remember that each is the
force on the jth particle from the other particles in the object. But by Newton’s third law, for every one of these
forces, there must be another force that has the same magnitude, but the opposite sign (points in the opposite
direction). These forces do not cancel; however, that’s not what we’re doing in the summation. Rather, we’re simply
mathematically adding up all the internal force vectors. That is, in general, the internal forces for any individual part
of the object won’t cancel, but when all the internal forces are added up, the internal forces must cancel in pairs. It
follows, therefore, that the sum of all the internal forces must be zero:
(This argument is subtle, but crucial; take plenty of time to completely understand it.)
For the external forces, this summation is simply the total external force that was applied to the whole object:
As a result,
9.25
This is an important result. Equation 9.25 tells us that the total change of momentum of the entire object (all N
particles) is due only to the external forces; the internal forces do not change the momentum of the object as a
whole. This is why you can’t lift yourself in the air by standing in a basket and pulling up on the handles: For the
system of you + basket, your upward pulling force is an internal force.

422 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Force and Momentum
Remember that our actual goal is to determine the equation of motion for the entire object (the entire system of
particles). To that end, let’s define:
the total momentum of the system of N particles (the reason for the subscript will become clear shortly)
Then we have
and therefore Equation 9.25 can be written simply as
9.26
Since this change of momentum is caused by only the net external force, we have dropped the “ext” subscript.
This is Newton’s second law, but now for the entire extended object. If this feels a bit anticlimactic, remember what
is hiding inside it: is the vector sum of the momentum of (in principle) hundreds of thousands of billions of
billions of particles , all caused by one simple net external force—a force that you can calculate.
Center of Mass
Our next task is to determine what part of the extended object, if any, is obeying Equation 9.26.
It’s tempting to take the next step; does the following equation mean anything?
9.27
If it does mean something (acceleration of what, exactly?), then we could write
and thus
which follows because the derivative of a sum is equal to the sum of the derivatives.
Now, is the momentum of the jth particle. Defining the positions of the constituent particles (relative to some
coordinate system) as , we thus have
Substituting back, we obtain
Dividing both sides by M (the total mass of the extended object) gives us
Access for free at openstax.org

9.6 • Center of Mass 423
9.28
Thus, the point in the object that traces out the trajectory dictated by the applied force in Equation 9.27 is inside the
parentheses in Equation 9.28.
Looking at this calculation, notice that (inside the parentheses) we are calculating the product of each particle’s
mass with its position, adding all N of these up, and dividing this sum by the total mass of particles we summed. This
is reminiscent of an average; inspired by this, we’ll (loosely) interpret it to be the weighted average position of the
mass of the extended object. It’s actually called the center of mass of the object. Notice that the position of the
center of mass has units of meters; that suggests a definition:
9.29
So, the point that obeys Equation 9.26 (and therefore Equation 9.27 as well) is the center of mass of the object,
which is located at the position vector .
It may surprise you to learn that there does not have to be any actual mass at the center of mass of an object. For
example, a hollow steel sphere with a vacuum inside it is spherically symmetrical (meaning its mass is uniformly
distributed about the center of the sphere); all of the sphere’s mass is out on its surface, with no mass inside. But it
can be shown that the center of mass of the sphere is at its geometric center, which seems reasonable. Thus, there
is no mass at the position of the center of mass of the sphere. (Another example is a doughnut.) The procedure to
find the center of mass is illustrated in Figure 9.27.

424 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.27 Finding the center of mass of a system of three different particles. (a) Position vectors are created for each object. (b) The
position vectors are multiplied by the mass of the corresponding object. (c) The scaled vectors from part (b) are added together. (d) The
final vector is divided by the total mass. This vector points to the center of mass of the system. Note that no mass is actually present at the
center of mass of this system.
Since , it follows that:
9.30
9.31
9.32
and thus
Therefore, you can calculate the components of the center of mass vector individually.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.6 • Center of Mass 425
Finally, to complete the kinematics, the instantaneous velocity of the center of mass is calculated exactly as you
might suspect:
9.33
and this, like the position, has x-, y-, and z-components.
To calculate the center of mass in actual situations, we recommend the following procedure:
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Calculating the Center of Mass
The center of mass of an object is a position vector. Thus, to calculate it, do these steps:
1. Define your coordinate system. Typically, the origin is placed at the location of one of the particles. This is not
required, however.
2. Determine the x, y, z-coordinates of each particle that makes up the object.
3. Determine the mass of each particle, and sum them to obtain the total mass of the object. Note that the mass
of the object at the origin must be included in the total mass.
4. Calculate the x-, y-, and z-components of the center of mass vector, using Equation 9.30, Equation 9.31, and
Equation 9.32.
5. If required, use the Pythagorean theorem to determine its magnitude.
Here are two examples that will give you a feel for what the center of mass is.
EXAMPLE 9.16
Center of Mass of the Earth-Moon System
Using data from text appendix, determine how far the center of mass of the Earth-moon system is from the center of
Earth. Compare this distance to the radius of Earth, and comment on the result. Ignore the other objects in the solar
system.
Strategy
We get the masses and separation distance of the Earth and moon, impose a coordinate system, and use Equation
9.29 with just objects. We use a subscript “e” to refer to Earth, and subscript “m” to refer to the moon.
Solution
Define the origin of the coordinate system as the center of Earth. Then, with just two objects, Equation 9.29
becomes
From Appendix D,
We defined the center of Earth as the origin, so . Inserting these into the equation for R gives

426 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Significance
The radius of Earth is , so the center of mass of the Earth-moon system is (6.37 − 4.64)
(roughly 1080 miles) below the surface of Earth. The location of the center
of mass is shown (not to scale).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.11
Suppose we included the sun in the system. Approximately where would the center of mass of the Earth-moon-sun
system be located? (Feel free to actually calculate it.)
EXAMPLE 9.17
Center of Mass of a Salt Crystal
Figure 9.28 shows a single crystal of sodium chloride—ordinary table salt. The sodium and chloride ions form a
single unit, NaCl. When multiple NaCl units group together, they form a cubic lattice. The smallest possible cube
(called the unit cell) consists of four sodium ions and four chloride ions, alternating. The length of one edge of this
cube (i.e., the bond length) is . Find the location of the center of mass of the unit cell. Specify it
either by its coordinates , or by and two angles.
Access for free at openstax.org

9.6 • Center of Mass 427
FIGURE 9.28 A drawing of a sodium chloride (NaCl) crystal.
Strategy
We can look up all the ion masses. If we impose a coordinate system on the unit cell, this will give us the positions of
the ions. We can then apply Equation 9.30, Equation 9.31, and Equation 9.32 (along with the Pythagorean theorem).
Solution
Define the origin to be at the location of the chloride ion at the bottom left of the unit cell. Figure 9.29 shows the
coordinate system.
FIGURE 9.29 A single unit cell of a NaCl crystal.
There are eight ions in this crystal, so N = 8:
The mass of each of the chloride ions is

428 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
so we have
For the sodium ions,
The total mass of the unit cell is therefore
From the geometry, the locations are
Substituting:
Similar calculations give (you could argue that this must be true, by symmetry,
but it’s a good idea to check).
Significance
Although this is a great exercise to determine the center of mass given a Chloride ion at the origin, in fact the origin
could be chosen at any location. Therefore, there is no meaningful application of the center of mass of a unit cell
beyond as an exercise.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.12
Suppose you have a macroscopic salt crystal (that is, a crystal that is large enough to be visible with your unaided
eye). It is made up of a huge number of unit cells. Is the center of mass of this crystal necessarily at the geometric
center of the crystal?
Two crucial concepts come out of these examples:
Access for free at openstax.org

9.6 • Center of Mass 429
1. As with all problems, you must define your coordinate system and origin. For center-of-mass calculations, it
often makes sense to choose your origin to be located at one of the masses of your system. That choice
automatically defines its distance in Equation 9.29 to be zero. However, you must still include the mass of the
object at your origin in your calculation of M, the total mass Equation 9.19. In the Earth-moon system
example, this means including the mass of Earth. If you hadn’t, you’d have ended up with the center of mass
of the system being at the center of the moon, which is clearly wrong.
2. In the second example (the salt crystal), notice that there is no mass at all at the location of the center of
mass. This is an example of what we stated above, that there does not have to be any actual mass at the
center of mass of an object.
Center of Mass of Continuous Objects
If the object in question has its mass distributed uniformly in space, rather than as a collection of discrete particles,
then , and the summation becomes an integral:
9.34
In this context, r is a characteristic dimension of the object (the radius of a sphere, the length of a long rod). To
generate an integrand that can actually be calculated, you need to express the differential mass element dm as a
function of the mass density of the continuous object, and the dimension r. An example will clarify this.
EXAMPLE 9.18
CM of a Uniform Thin Hoop
Find the center of mass of a uniform thin hoop (or ring) of mass M and radius r.
Strategy
First, the hoop’s symmetry suggests the center of mass should be at its geometric center. If we define our
coordinate system such that the origin is located at the center of the hoop, the integral should evaluate to zero.
We replace dm with an expression involving the density of the hoop and the radius of the hoop. We then have an
expression we can actually integrate. Since the hoop is described as “thin,” we treat it as a one-dimensional object,
neglecting the thickness of the hoop. Therefore, its density is expressed as the number of kilograms of material per
meter. Such a density is called a linear mass density, and is given the symbol ; this is the Greek letter “lambda,”
which is the equivalent of the English letter “l” (for “linear”).
Since the hoop is described as uniform, this means that the linear mass density is constant. Thus, to get our
expression for the differential mass element dm, we multiply by a differential length of the hoop, substitute, and
integrate (with appropriate limits for the definite integral).
Solution
First, define our coordinate system and the relevant variables (Figure 9.30).

430 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.30 Finding the center of mass of a uniform hoop. We express the coordinates of a differential piece of the hoop, and then
integrate around the hoop.
The center of mass is calculated with Equation 9.34:
We have to determine the limits of integration a and b. Expressing in component form gives us
In the diagram, we highlighted a piece of the hoop that is of differential length ds; it therefore has a differential mass
. Substituting:
However, the arc length ds subtends a differential angle , so we have
and thus
One more step: Since is the linear mass density, it is computed by dividing the total mass by the length of the
hoop:
giving us
Access for free at openstax.org

9.6 • Center of Mass 431
Notice that the variable of integration is now the angle . This tells us that the limits of integration (around the
circular hoop) are , so and . Also, for convenience, we separate the integral into the x-
and y-components of . The final integral expression is
as expected.
Center of Mass and Conservation of Momentum
How does all this connect to conservation of momentum?
Suppose you have N objects with masses and initial velocities . The center of
mass of the objects is
Its velocity is
9.35
and thus the initial momentum of the center of mass is
After these masses move and interact with each other, the momentum of the center of mass is
But conservation of momentum tells us that the right-hand side of both equations must be equal, which says
9.36
This result implies that conservation of momentum is expressed in terms of the center of mass of the system. Notice
that as an object moves through space with no net external force acting on it, an individual particle of the object may
accelerate in various directions, with various magnitudes, depending on the net internal force acting on that object
at any time. (Remember, it is only the vector sum of all the internal forces that vanishes, not the internal force on a
single particle.) Thus, such a particle’s momentum will not be constant—but the momentum of the entire extended
object will be, in accord with Equation 9.36.