# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 274-281
############################################################

262 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
The magnitude of the force is now easily found:
Significance
The original problem was stated in terms of vector components, so we used vector methods. Compare this
example with the previous example.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.5
Find the direction of the resultant for the 1.50-kg model helicopter.
EXAMPLE 6.8
Baggage Tractor
Figure 6.8(a) shows a baggage tractor pulling luggage carts from an airplane. The tractor has mass 650.0 kg, while
cart A has mass 250.0 kg and cart B has mass 150.0 kg. The driving force acting for a brief period of time
accelerates the system from rest and acts for 3.00 s. (a) If this driving force is given by find the
speed after 3.00 seconds. (b) What is the horizontal force acting on the connecting cable between the tractor and
cart A at this instant?
FIGURE 6.8 (a) A free-body diagram is shown, which indicates all the external forces on the system consisting of the tractor and baggage
carts for carrying airline luggage. (b) A free-body diagram of the tractor only is shown isolated in order to calculate the tension in the cable
to the carts.
Strategy
A free-body diagram shows the driving force of the tractor, which gives the system its acceleration. We only need to
consider motion in the horizontal direction. The vertical forces balance each other and it is not necessary to consider
them. For part b, we make use of a free-body diagram of the tractor alone to determine the force between it and cart
A. This exposes the coupling force which is our objective.
Solution
a. and so
Since acceleration is a function of time, we can determine the velocity of the tractor by using with the
initial condition that at We integrate from to
Access for free at openstax.org

6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 263
b. Refer to the free-body diagram in Figure 6.8(b).
Significance
Since the force varies with time, we must use calculus to solve this problem. Notice how the total mass of the
system was important in solving Figure 6.8(a), whereas only the mass of the truck (since it supplied the force) was of
use in Figure 6.8(b).
Recall that and . If acceleration is a function of time, we can use the calculus forms developed in
Motion Along a Straight Line, as shown in this example. However, sometimes acceleration is a function of
displacement. In this case, we can derive an important result from these calculus relations. Solving for dt in each,
we have and Now, equating these expressions, we have We can rearrange this to obtain
EXAMPLE 6.9
Motion of a Projectile Fired Vertically
A 10.0-kg mortar shell is fired vertically upward from the ground, with an initial velocity of 50.0 m/s (see Figure 6.9).
Determine the maximum height it will travel if atmospheric resistance is measured as where v
is the speed at any instant.
FIGURE 6.9 (a) The mortar fires a shell straight up; we consider the friction force provided by the air. (b) A free-body diagram is shown
which indicates all the forces on the mortar shell. (credit a: modification of work by OS541/DoD; The appearance of U.S. Department of
Defense (DoD) visual information does not imply or constitute DoD endorsement.)
Strategy
The known force on the mortar shell can be related to its acceleration using the equations of motion. Kinematics can
then be used to relate the mortar shell’s acceleration to its position.

264 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Solution
Initially, and At the maximum height The free-body diagram shows to act
downward, because it slows the upward motion of the mortar shell. Thus, we can write
The acceleration depends on v and is therefore variable. Since we can relate a to v using the
rearrangement described above,
We replace ds with dy because we are dealing with the vertical direction,
We now separate the variables (v’s and dv’s on one side; dy on the other):
Thus,
Significance
Notice the need to apply calculus since the force is not constant, which also means that acceleration is not constant.
To make matters worse, the force depends on v (not t), and so we must use the trick explained prior to the example.
The answer for the height indicates a lower elevation if there were air resistance. We will deal with the effects of air
resistance and other drag forces in greater detail in Drag Force and Terminal Speed.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.6
If atmospheric resistance is neglected, find the maximum height for the mortar shell. Is calculus required for this
solution?
INTERACTIVE
Explore the forces at work in this simulation (https://openstax.org/l/21forcesatwork) when you try to push a filing
cabinet. Create an applied force and see the resulting frictional force and total force acting on the cabinet. Charts
show the forces, position, velocity, and acceleration vs. time. View a free-body diagram of all the forces (including
gravitational and normal forces).
Access for free at openstax.org

6.2 • Friction 265
6.2 Friction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the general characteristics of friction
• List the various types of friction
• Calculate the magnitude of static and kinetic friction, and use these in problems involving Newton’s laws
of motion
When a body is in motion, it has resistance because the body interacts with its surroundings. This resistance is a
force of friction. Friction opposes relative motion between systems in contact but also allows us to move, a concept
that becomes obvious if you try to walk on ice. Friction is a common yet complex force, and its behavior still not
completely understood. Still, it is possible to understand the circumstances in which it behaves.
Static and Kinetic Friction
The basic definition of friction is relatively simple to state.
FRICTION
Friction is a force that opposes relative motion between systems in contact.
There are several forms of friction. One of the simpler characteristics of sliding friction is that it is parallel to the
contact surfaces between systems and is always in a direction that opposes motion or attempted motion of the
systems relative to each other. If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one another, then the friction
between them is called kinetic friction. For example, friction slows a hockey puck sliding on ice. When objects are
stationary, static friction can act between them; the static friction is usually greater than the kinetic friction between
two objects.
STATIC AND KINETIC FRICTION
If two systems are in contact and stationary relative to one another, then the friction between them is called
static friction. If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one another, then the friction between them
is called kinetic friction.
Imagine, for example, trying to slide a heavy crate across a concrete floor—you might push very hard on the crate
and not move it at all. This means that the static friction responds to what you do—it increases to be equal to and in
the opposite direction of your push. If you finally push hard enough, the crate seems to slip suddenly and starts to
move. Now static friction gives way to kinetic friction. Once in motion, it is easier to keep it in motion than it was to
get it started, indicating that the kinetic frictional force is less than the static frictional force. If you add mass to the
crate, say by placing a box on top of it, you need to push even harder to get it started and also to keep it moving.
Furthermore, if you oiled the concrete you would find it easier to get the crate started and keep it going (as you
might expect).
Figure 6.10 is a crude pictorial representation of how friction occurs at the interface between two objects. Close-up
inspection of these surfaces shows them to be rough. Thus, when you push to get an object moving (in this case, a
crate), you must raise the object until it can skip along with just the tips of the surface hitting, breaking off the
points, or both. A considerable force can be resisted by friction with no apparent motion. The harder the surfaces
are pushed together (such as if another box is placed on the crate), the more force is needed to move them. Part of
the friction is due to adhesive forces between the surface molecules of the two objects, which explains the
dependence of friction on the nature of the substances. For example, rubber-soled shoes slip less than those with
leather soles. Adhesion varies with substances in contact and is a complicated aspect of surface physics. Once an
object is moving, there are fewer points of contact (fewer molecules adhering), so less force is required to keep the
object moving. At small but nonzero speeds, friction is nearly independent of speed.

266 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.10 Frictional forces, such as always oppose motion or attempted motion between objects in contact. Friction arises in part
because of the roughness of the surfaces in contact, as seen in the expanded view. For the object to move, it must rise to where the peaks
of the top surface can skip along the bottom surface. Thus, a force is required just to set the object in motion. Some of the peaks will be
broken off, also requiring a force to maintain motion. Much of the friction is actually due to attractive forces between molecules making up
the two objects, so that even perfectly smooth surfaces are not friction-free. (In fact, perfectly smooth, clean surfaces of similar materials
would adhere, forming a bond called a “cold weld.”)
The magnitude of the frictional force has two forms: one for static situations (static friction), the other for situations
involving motion (kinetic friction). What follows is an approximate empirical (experimentally determined) model
only. These equations for static and kinetic friction are not vector equations.
MAGNITUDE OF STATIC FRICTION
The magnitude of static friction is
6.1
where is the coefficient of static friction and N is the magnitude of the normal force.
The symbol means less than or equal to, implying that static friction can have a maximum value of Static
friction is a responsive force that increases to be equal and opposite to whatever force is exerted, up to its maximum
limit. Once the applied force exceeds
the object moves. Thus,
MAGNITUDE OF KINETIC FRICTION
The magnitude of kinetic friction is given by
6.2
where is the coefficient of kinetic friction.
A system in which is described as a system in which friction behaves simply. The transition from static
friction to kinetic friction is illustrated in Figure 6.11.
Access for free at openstax.org

6.2 • Friction 267
FIGURE 6.11 (a) The force of friction between the block and the rough surface opposes the direction of the applied force The
magnitude of the static friction balances that of the applied force. This is shown in the left side of the graph in (c). (b) At some point, the
magnitude of the applied force is greater than the force of kinetic friction, and the block moves to the right. This is shown in the right side of
the graph. (c) The graph of the frictional force versus the applied force; note that This means that
As you can see in Table 6.1, the coefficients of kinetic friction are less than their static counterparts. The
approximate values of are stated to only one or two digits to indicate the approximate description of friction given
by the preceding two equations.
System Static Friction Kinetic Friction
Rubber on dry concrete 1.0 0.7
Rubber on wet concrete 0.5-0.7 0.3-0.5
Wood on wood 0.5 0.3
Waxed wood on wet snow 0.14 0.1
Metal on wood 0.5 0.3
Steel on steel (dry) 0.6 0.3
Steel on steel (oiled) 0.05 0.03
Teflon on steel 0.04 0.04
Bone lubricated by synovial fluid 0.016 0.015
Shoes on wood 0.9 0.7
Shoes on ice 0.1 0.05
Ice on ice 0.1 0.03
Steel on ice 0.04 0.02
TABLE 6.1 Approximate Coefficients of Static and Kinetic Friction

268 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Equation 6.1 and Equation 6.2 include the dependence of friction on materials and the normal force. The direction of
friction is always opposite that of motion, parallel to the surface between objects, and perpendicular to the normal
force. For example, if the crate you try to push (with a force parallel to the floor) has a mass of 100 kg, then the
normal force is equal to its weight,
perpendicular to the floor. If the coefficient of static friction is 0.45, you would have to exert a force parallel to the
floor greater than
to move the crate. Once there is motion, friction is less and the coefficient of kinetic friction might be 0.30, so that a
force of only
keeps it moving at a constant speed. If the floor is lubricated, both coefficients are considerably less than they
would be without lubrication. Coefficient of friction is a unitless quantity with a magnitude usually between 0 and
1.0. The actual value depends on the two surfaces that are in contact.
Many people have experienced the slipperiness of walking on ice. However, many parts of the body, especially the
joints, have much smaller coefficients of friction—often three or four times less than ice. A joint is formed by the
ends of two bones, which are connected by thick tissues. The knee joint is formed by the lower leg bone (the tibia)
and the thighbone (the femur). The hip is a ball (at the end of the femur) and socket (part of the pelvis) joint. The
ends of the bones in the joint are covered by cartilage, which provides a smooth, almost-glassy surface. The joints
also produce a fluid (synovial fluid) that reduces friction and wear. A damaged or arthritic joint can be replaced by an
artificial joint (Figure 6.12). These replacements can be made of metals (stainless steel or titanium) or plastic
(polyethylene), also with very small coefficients of friction.
FIGURE 6.12 Artificial knee replacement is a procedure that has been performed for more than 20 years. These post-operative X-rays show
a right knee joint replacement. (credit: modification of work by Mike Baird)
Natural lubricants include saliva produced in our mouths to aid in the swallowing process, and the slippery mucus
found between organs in the body, allowing them to move freely past each other during heartbeats, during
breathing, and when a person moves. Hospitals and doctor’s clinics commonly use artificial lubricants, such as gels,
to reduce friction.
The equations given for static and kinetic friction are empirical laws that describe the behavior of the forces of
friction. While these formulas are very useful for practical purposes, they do not have the status of mathematical
statements that represent general principles (e.g., Newton’s second law). In fact, there are cases for which these
equations are not even good approximations. For instance, neither formula is accurate for lubricated surfaces or for
two surfaces sliding across each other at high speeds. Unless specified, we will not be concerned with these
exceptions.
Access for free at openstax.org