# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 350-355
############################################################

338 7 • Chapter Review
How much instantaneous power does she exert 83 . When jogging at 13 km/h on a level surface, a
at ? 70-kg man uses energy at a rate of
approximately 850 W. Using the facts that the
82 . A typical automobile engine has an efficiency of
“human engine” is approximately 25% efficient,
25%. Suppose that the engine of a 1000-kg
determine the rate at which this man uses
automobile has a maximum power output of 140
energy when jogging up a slope at this
hp. What is the maximum grade that the
same speed. Assume that the frictional retarding
automobile can climb at 50 km/h if the frictional
force is the same in both cases.
retarding force on it is 300 N?
Additional Problems
84 . A cart is pulled a distance D on a flat, horizontal from the origin to a point 5 meters to the right on
surface by a constant force F that acts at an angle the x-axis.
with the horizontal direction. The other forces on the
89 . A boy pulls a 5-kg cart with a 20-N force at an
object during this time are gravity ( ), normal
angle of above the horizontal for a length of
forces ( ) and ( ), and rolling frictions
time. Over this time frame, the cart moves a
and , as shown below. What is the work done by
distance of 12 m on the horizontal floor. (a) Find
each force?
the work done on the cart by the boy. (b) What
will be the work done by the boy if he pulled with
the same force horizontally instead of at an
angle of above the horizontal over the same
distance?
90 . A crate of mass 200 kg is to be brought from a
site on the ground floor to a third floor
apartment. The workers know that they can
either use the elevator first, then slide it along
the third floor to the apartment, or first slide the
crate to another location marked C below, and
85 . Consider a particle on which several forces act, then take the elevator to the third floor and slide
one of which is known to be constant in time: it on the third floor a shorter distance. The
As a result, the particle trouble is that the third floor is very rough
moves along the x-axis from to in compared to the ground floor. Given that the
coefficient of kinetic friction between the crate
some time interval. What is the work done by
and the ground floor is 0.100 and between the
?
crate and the third floor surface is 0.300, find
86 . Consider a particle on which several forces act, the work needed by the workers for each path
one of which is known to be constant in time: shown from A to E. Assume that the force the
As a result, the particle workers need to do is just enough to slide the
moves first along the x-axis from to crate at constant velocity (zero acceleration).
and then parallel to the y-axis from Note: The work by the elevator against the force
to What is the work done by ? of gravity is not done by the workers.
87 . Consider a particle on which several forces act,
one of which is known to be constant in time:
As a result, the particle
moves along a straight path from a Cartesian
coordinate of (0 m, 0 m) to (5 m, 6 m). What is
the work done by ?
88 . Consider a particle on which a force acts that
depends on the position of the particle. This
force is given by Find the
work done by this force when the particle moves
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Chapter Review 339
constant of the spring.
94 . You are driving your car on a straight road with a
coefficient of friction between the tires and the
road of 0.55. A large piece of debris falls in front
of your view and you immediate slam on the
brakes, leaving a skid mark of 30.5 m (100-feet)
long before coming to a stop. A policeman sees
your car stopped on the road, looks at the skid
mark, and gives you a ticket for traveling over
the 13.4 m/s (30 mph) speed limit. Should you
fight the speeding ticket in court?
95 . A crate is being pushed across a rough floor
91 . A hockey puck of mass 0.17 kg is shot across a surface. If no force is applied on the crate, the
rough floor with the roughness different at crate will slow down and come to a stop. If the
different places, which can be described by a crate of mass 50 kg moving at speed 8 m/s
position-dependent coefficient of kinetic comes to rest in 10 seconds, what is the rate at
friction. For a puck moving along the x-axis, the which the frictional force on the crate takes
coefficient of kinetic friction is the following energy away from the crate?
function of x, where x is in m:
96 . Suppose a horizontal force of 20 N is required to
Find the work done by the
maintain a speed of 8 m/s of a 50 kg crate. (a)
kinetic frictional force on the hockey puck when
What is the power of this force? (b) Note that the
it has moved (a) from to , and (b)
acceleration of the crate is zero despite the fact
from to .
that 20 N force acts on the crate horizontally.
92 . A horizontal force of 20 N is required to keep a What happens to the energy given to the crate as
5.0 kg box traveling at a constant speed up a a result of the work done by this 20 N force?
frictionless incline for a vertical height change of
97 . Grains from a hopper falls at a rate of 10 kg/s
3.0 m. (a) What is the work done by gravity
vertically onto a conveyor belt that is moving
during this change in height? (b) What is the
horizontally at a constant speed of 2 m/s. (a)
work done by the normal force? (c) What is the
What force is needed to keep the conveyor belt
work done by the horizontal force?
moving at the constant velocity? (b) What is the
93 . A 7.0-kg box slides along a horizontal minimum power of the motor driving the
frictionless floor at 1.7 m/s and collides with a conveyor belt?
relatively massless spring that compresses 23
98 . A cyclist in a race must climb a hill at a speed
cm before the box comes to a stop. (a) How
of 8 m/s. If the mass of the bike and the biker
much kinetic energy does the box have before it
together is 80 kg, what must be the power
collides with the spring? (b) Calculate the work
output of the biker to achieve the goal?
done by the spring. (c) Determine the spring
Challenge Problems
99 . Shown below is a 40-kg crate that is pushed at
constant velocity a distance 8.0 m along a
incline by the horizontal force The coefficient
of kinetic friction between the crate and the
incline is Calculate the work done by
(a) the applied force, (b) the frictional force, (c)
the gravitational force, and (d) the net force.
100 . The surface of the preceding problem is
modified so that the coefficient of kinetic friction

340 7 • Chapter Review
is decreased. The same horizontal force is (Hint: You will probably need to consult a table
applied to the crate, and after being pushed 8.0 of integrals.)
m, its speed is 5.0 m/s. How much work is now
105 . Answer the preceding problem using polar
done by the force of friction? Assume that the
coordinates.
crate starts at rest.
106 . Constant power P is delivered to a car of mass m
101 . The force F(x) varies with position, as shown
by its engine. Show that if air resistance can be
below. Find the work done by this force on a
ignored, the distance covered in a time t by the
particle as it moves from to
car, starting from rest, is given by
107 . Suppose that the air resistance a car encounters
is independent of its speed. When the car travels
at 15 m/s, its engine delivers 20 hp to its
wheels. (a) What is the power delivered to the
wheels when the car travels at 30 m/s? (b) How
much energy does the car use in covering 10 km
at 15 m/s? At 30 m/s? Assume that the engine is
25% efficient. (c) Answer the same questions if
the force of air resistance is proportional to the
102 . Find the work done by the same force in
speed of the automobile. (d) What do these
Example 7.4, between the same points,
results, plus your experience with gasoline
, over a circular
consumption, tell you about air resistance?
arc of radius 2 m, centered at (0, 2 m). Evaluate
the path integral using Cartesian coordinates. 108 . Consider a linear spring, as in Figure 7.7(a), with
(Hint: You will probably need to consult a table mass M uniformly distributed along its length.
of integrals.) The left end of the spring is fixed, but the right
end, at the equilibrium position is moving
103 . Answer the preceding problem using polar
with speed v in the x-direction. What is the total
coordinates.
kinetic energy of the spring? (Hint: First express
104 . Find the work done by the same force in the kinetic energy of an infinitesimal element of
Example 7.4, between the same points, the spring dm in terms of the total mass,
, over a circular equilibrium length, speed of the right-hand end,
arc of radius 2 m, centered at (2 m, 0). Evaluate and position along the spring; then integrate.)
the path integral using Cartesian coordinates.
Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 8
Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
FIGURE 8.1 Shown here is part of a Ball Machine sculpture by George Rhoads. A ball in this contraption is lifted, rolls, falls, bounces, and
collides with various objects, but throughout its travels, its kinetic energy changes in definite, predictable amounts, which depend on its
position and the objects with which it interacts. (credit: modification of work by Roland Tanglao)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
8.1 Potential Energy of a System
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
8.3 Conservation of Energy
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
8.5 Sources of Energy
INTRODUCTION In George Rhoads’ rolling ball sculpture, the principle of conservation of energy governs the
changes in the ball’s kinetic energy and relates them to changes and transfers for other types of energy associated
with the ball’s interactions. In this chapter, we introduce the important concept of potential energy. This will enable
us to formulate the law of conservation of mechanical energy and to apply it to simple systems, making solving
problems easier. In the final section on sources of energy, we will consider energy transfers and the general law of
conservation of energy. Throughout this book, the law of conservation of energy will be applied in increasingly more
detail, as you encounter more complex and varied systems, and other forms of energy.
8.1 Potential Energy of a System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Relate the difference of potential energy to work done on a particle for a system without friction or air
drag
• Explain the meaning of the zero of the potential energy function for a system
• Calculate and apply the gravitational potential energy for an object near Earth’s surface and the elastic
potential energy of a mass-spring system
In Work, we saw that the work done on an object by the constant gravitational force, near the surface of Earth, over

342 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
any displacement is a function only of the difference in the positions of the end-points of the displacement. This
property allows us to define a different kind of energy for the system than its kinetic energy, which is called
potential energy. We consider various properties and types of potential energy in the following subsections.
Potential Energy Basics
In Motion in Two and Three Dimensions, we analyzed the motion of a projectile, like kicking a football in Figure 8.2.
For this example, let’s ignore friction and air resistance and begin the analysis immediately after the kick, at the start
of the projectile motion of the ball. As the football rises, the work done by the gravitational force on the football is
negative, because the ball’s displacement is positive vertically and the force due to gravity is negative vertically. We
also noted that the ball slowed down until it reached its highest point in the motion, thereby decreasing the ball’s
kinetic energy. This loss in kinetic energy translates to a gain in gravitational potential energy of the football-Earth
system.
As the football falls toward Earth, the work done on the football is now positive, because the displacement and the
gravitational force both point vertically downward. The ball also speeds up, which indicates an increase in kinetic
energy. Therefore, energy is converted from gravitational potential energy back into kinetic energy.
FIGURE 8.2 As a football starts its descent toward the wide receiver, gravitational potential energy is converted back into kinetic energy.
Based on this scenario, we can define the difference of potential energy from point A to point B as the negative of
the work done:
8.1
This formula explicitly states a potential energy difference, not just an absolute potential energy. Therefore, we
need to define potential energy at a given position in such a way as to state standard values of potential energy on
their own, rather than potential energy differences. We do this by rewriting the potential energy function in terms of
an arbitrary constant,
8.2
The choice of the potential energy at a starting location of is made out of convenience in the given problem. Most
importantly, whatever choice is made should be stated and kept consistent throughout the given problem. There are
some well-accepted choices of initial potential energy. For example, the lowest height in a problem is usually
defined as zero potential energy, or if an object is in space, the farthest point away from the system is often defined
as zero potential energy. Then, the potential energy, with respect to zero at is just
As long as there is no friction or air resistance, the change in kinetic energy of the football equals negative of the
change in gravitational potential energy of the football. This can be generalized to any potential energy:
8.3
Access for free at openstax.org