# REAL PDF — openstax_vol1.pdf, pages 506-514
############################################################

494 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use the work-energy theorem to analyze rotation to find the work done on a system when it is rotated
about a fixed axis for a finite angular displacement
• Solve for the angular velocity of a rotating rigid body using the work-energy theorem
• Find the power delivered to a rotating rigid body given the applied torque and angular velocity
• Summarize the rotational variables and equations and relate them to their translational counterparts
Thus far in the chapter, we have extensively addressed kinematics and dynamics for rotating rigid bodies around a
fixed axis. In this final section, we define work and power within the context of rotation about a fixed axis, which has
applications to both physics and engineering. The discussion of work and power makes our treatment of rotational
motion almost complete, with the exception of rolling motion and angular momentum, which are discussed in
Angular Momentum. We begin this section with a treatment of the work-energy theorem for rotation.
Work for Rotational Motion
Now that we have determined how to calculate kinetic energy for rotating rigid bodies, we can proceed with a
discussion of the work done on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis. Figure 10.39 shows a rigid body that has
rotated through an angle from A to B while under the influence of a force . The external force is applied to
point P, whose position is , and the rigid body is constrained to rotate about a fixed axis that is perpendicular to the
page and passes through O. The rotational axis is fixed, so the vector moves in a circle of radius r, and the vector
is perpendicular to
FIGURE 10.39 A rigid body rotates through an angle from A to B by the action of an external force applied to point P.
The work by the force is given by Equation 7.2,
In this equation, is the displacement of point P, not a change in the moment arm. That is:
Substituting this into the definition of work, we have
Access for free at openstax.org

10.8 • Work and Power for Rotational Motion 495
Since is perpendicular to , we can see that , the torque by the force F. Evaluating the work using the net
torque, we arrive at the expression for the net rotational work done on a rigid body:
10.27
>
The total work done on a rigid body is the sum of the torques integrated over the angle through which the body
rotates. The incremental work is
10.28
In a rigid body, all particles rotate through the same angle; thus the work of every external force is equal to the
torque times the common incremental angle . The quantity is the net torque on the body due to
external forces.
Similarly, we found the kinetic energy of a rigid body rotating around a fixed axis by summing the kinetic energy of
each particle that makes up the rigid body. Since the work-energy theorem is valid for each particle, it is
valid for the sum of the particles and the entire body.
WORK-ENERGY THEOREM FOR ROTATION
The work-energy theorem for a rigid body rotating around a fixed axis is
10.29
where
and the rotational work done by a net force rotating a body from point A to point B is
10.30
We give a strategy for using this equation when analyzing rotational motion.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Work-Energy Theorem for Rotational Motion
1. Identify the forces on the body and draw a free-body diagram. Calculate the torque for each force.
2. Calculate the work done during the body’s rotation by every torque.
3. Apply the work-energy theorem by equating the net work done on the body to the change in rotational kinetic
energy.
Let’s look at two examples and use the work-energy theorem to analyze rotational motion.

496 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
EXAMPLE 10.17
Rotational Work and Energy
A torque is applied to a flywheel that rotates about a fixed axis and has a moment of inertia of
. If the flywheel is initially at rest, what is its angular velocity after it has turned through eight
revolutions?
Strategy
We apply the work-energy theorem. We know from the problem description what the torque is and the angular
displacement of the flywheel. Then we can solve for the final angular velocity.
Solution
The flywheel turns through eight revolutions, which is radians. The work done by the torque, which is constant
and therefore can come outside the integral in Equation 10.30, is
We apply the work-energy theorem:
With , we have
Therefore,
This is the angular velocity of the flywheel after eight revolutions.
Significance
The work-energy theorem provides an efficient way to analyze rotational motion, connecting torque with rotational
kinetic energy.
EXAMPLE 10.18
Rotational Work: A Pulley
A string wrapped around the pulley in Figure 10.40 is pulled with a constant downward force of magnitude 50 N.
The radius R and moment of inertia I of the pulley are 0.10 m and , respectively. If the string does
not slip, what is the angular velocity of the pulley after 1.0 m of string has unwound? Assume the pulley starts from
rest.
Access for free at openstax.org

10.8 • Work and Power for Rotational Motion 497
FIGURE 10.40 (a) A string is wrapped around a pulley of radius R. (b) The free-body diagram.
Strategy
Looking at the free-body diagram, we see that neither , the force on the bearings of the pulley, nor , the weight
of the pulley, exerts a torque around the rotational axis, and therefore does no work on the pulley. As the pulley
rotates through an angle acts through a distance d such that
Solution
Since the torque due to has magnitude , we have
If the force on the string acts through a distance of 1.0 m, we have, from the work-energy theorem,
Solving for , we obtain
Power for Rotational Motion
Power always comes up in the discussion of applications in engineering and physics. Power for rotational motion is
equally as important as power in linear motion and can be derived in a similar way as in linear motion when the force
is a constant. The linear power when the force is a constant is . If the net torque is constant over the
angular displacement, Equation 10.25 simplifies and the net torque can be taken out of the integral. In the following
discussion, we assume the net torque is constant. We can apply the definition of power derived in Power to
rotational motion. From Work and Kinetic Energy, the instantaneous power (or just power) is defined as the rate of
doing work,
If we have a constant net torque, Equation 10.27 becomes and the power is
or

498 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.31
EXAMPLE 10.19
Torque on a Boat Propeller
A boat engine operating at is running at 300 rev/min. What is the torque on the propeller shaft?
Strategy
We are given the rotation rate in rev/min and the power consumption, so we can easily calculate the torque.
Solution
Significance
It is important to note the radian is a dimensionless unit because its definition is the ratio of two lengths. It
therefore does not appear in the solution.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.8
A constant torque of is applied to a wind turbine to keep it rotating at 6 rad/s. What is the power
required to keep the turbine rotating?
Rotational and Translational Relationships Summarized
The rotational quantities and their linear analog are summarized in three tables. Table 10.5 summarizes the
rotational variables for circular motion about a fixed axis with their linear analogs and the connecting equation,
except for the centripetal acceleration, which stands by itself. Table 10.6 summarizes the rotational and
translational kinematic equations. Table 10.7 summarizes the rotational dynamics equations with their linear
analogs.
Rotational Translational Relationship
TABLE 10.5 Rotational and Translational Variables:
Summary
Access for free at openstax.org

10.8 • Work and Power for Rotational Motion 499
Rotational Translational
TABLE 10.6 Rotational and Translational Kinematic
Equations: Summary
Rotational Translational
m
TABLE 10.7 Rotational and Translational Equations:
Dynamics

500 10 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
angular acceleration time rate of change of angular parallel axis axis of rotation that is parallel to an axis
velocity about which the moment of inertia of an object is
angular position angle a body has rotated through in known
a fixed coordinate system parallel-axis theorem if the moment of inertia is
angular velocity time rate of change of angular known for a given axis, it can be found for any axis
position parallel to it
instantaneous angular acceleration derivative of rotational dynamics analysis of rotational motion
angular velocity with respect to time using the net torque and moment of inertia to find
instantaneous angular velocity derivative of angular the angular acceleration
position with respect to time rotational kinetic energy kinetic energy due to the
kinematics of rotational motion describes the rotation of an object; this is part of its total kinetic
relationships among rotation angle, angular velocity, energy
angular acceleration, and time rotational work work done on a rigid body due to the
lever arm perpendicular distance from the line that sum of the torques integrated over the angle
the force vector lies on to a given axis through with the body rotates
linear mass density the mass per unit length of a surface mass density mass per unit area of a two
one dimensional object dimensional object
moment of inertia rotational mass of rigid bodies torque cross product of a force and a lever arm to a
that relates to how easy or hard it will be to change given axis
the angular velocity of the rotating rigid body total linear acceleration vector sum of the
Newton’s second law for rotation sum of the torques centripetal acceleration vector and the tangential
on a rotating system equals its moment of inertia acceleration vector
times its angular acceleration
Key Equations
Angular position
Angular velocity
Tangential speed
Angular acceleration
Tangential acceleration
Average angular velocity
Angular displacement
Angular velocity from constant angular acceleration
Angular velocity from displacement and
constant angular acceleration
Change in angular velocity
Total acceleration
Rotational kinetic energy
Moment of inertia
Rotational kinetic energy in terms of the
moment of inertia of a rigid body
Moment of inertia of a continuous object
Access for free at openstax.org

10 • Chapter Review 501
Parallel-axis theorem
Moment of inertia of a compound object
Torque vector
Magnitude of torque
Total torque
Newton’s second law for rotation
Incremental work done by a torque
Work-energy theorem
Rotational work done by net force
Rotational power
Summary
10.1 Rotational Variables body is decreasing, the angular acceleration is in
the opposite direction to . If the rotation rate is
• The angular position of a rotating body is the
increasing, the angular acceleration is in the
angle the body has rotated through in a fixed
same direction as .
coordinate system, which serves as a frame of
• The tangential acceleration of a point at a radius
reference.
from the axis of rotation is the angular
• The angular velocity of a rotating body about a
acceleration times the radius to the point.
fixed axis is defined as , the rotational
rate of the body in radians per second. The 10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
instantaneous angular velocity of a rotating body
• The kinematics of rotational motion describes
is the derivative with respect
the relationships among rotation angle (angular
to time of the angular position , found by taking position), angular velocity, angular acceleration,
the limit in the average angular velocity and time.
. The angular velocity relates to the • For a constant angular acceleration, the angular
tangential speed of a point on the rotating body velocity varies linearly. Therefore, the average
through the relation , where r is the angular velocity is 1/2 the initial plus final
radius to the point and is the tangential speed angular velocity over a given time period:
at the given point.
• The angular velocity is found using the right-
hand rule. If the fingers curl in the direction of • We used a graphical analysis to find solutions to
rotation about a fixed axis, the thumb points in fixed-axis rotation with constant angular
the direction of (see Figure 10.5). acceleration. From the relation , we
• If the system’s angular velocity is not constant, found that the area under an angular velocity-vs.-
then the system has an angular acceleration. The time curve gives the angular displacement,
average angular acceleration over a given time
interval is the change in angular velocity over this . The results of the
time interval, . The instantaneous
angular acceleration is the time derivative of
graphical analysis were verified using the
angular velocity, . The
kinematic equations for constant angular
angular acceleration is found by locating the acceleration. Similarly, since , the area
angular velocity. If a rotation rate of a rotating under an angular acceleration-vs.-time graph